 13 – SHOES, SWIMMING, AND WORMS

      Every evening before bed, Mama made us wash our feet in a bucket of cold water.  Della and Ollie were practically grown-up girls now, so they usually stayed in the house and helped Ma, but the rest of us usually went around barefoot.  Who wanted to bother with shoes, especially in summer?  They just got dirty when you were swimming in the river or playing ball.    
      Emma, of course, always wore shoes, and kept her dress neat and tidy too.  Mama liked her.  I would have been glad they got along if Mama hadn’t kept asking why she couldn’t have had one child, “Just one child!” more like Emma.  
      One hot August afternoon, me and Pearl decided to teach Emma to swim, so the three of us started walking down to the swimming hole.  Emma had put on her oldest dress (which was just about as nice as the best one Pearl had), but still carried a book under her arm.  I glanced at the title – Treasure Island.
      “Ain’t you read that book before?” I said.
      “Yes,” said Emma, “it’s one of my favorites.”
      “What’s it about?” asked Pearl.
      “You wouldn’t like it,” I told her.  “It ain’t got no pictures.  I checked.”
      “It’s about a treasure map, and sailing on ships, and a pirate named Long John Silver.”
      “A pirate!” exclaimed Pearl.
      That was all the encouragement Emma needed.  By the time we’d reached the river and she’d finished telling us ‘bout brave Jim Hawkins and Billy Bones and the mutiny and finding the treasure and the talking parrot, I almost felt like I’d read the book myself.  And it didn’t sound half bad, what with the pirates and the map and all.   
      “But enough about Treasure Island,” Emma said when we reached the curve in the riverbank that made the water shallow and slow-moving.  “Aren’t you going to teach me how to swim?”
      “Gotta take off your shoes,” I said.
      Emma looked down at her shoes.  The patent leather was dirty and scuffed already, but the leather straps were still in good shape.  She glanced at the muddy water.
      “But I can’t see what’s in the water.”
      “So?” I asked.
      “So how will I know what’s on the bottom?”
      “I can tell you,” chimed in Pearl.  “Mud, sticks, crawdads, and a rock or two.” 
      Emma made a face.  
      “The normal stuff.  Just be careful not to stub your toe,” explained Pearl.
      “Maybe I’ll pass on swimming,” said Emma.  
      “Didn’t you just say you wished you could sail around the world like one of those pirates you were telling us about?” I asked.
      “Yeah.”
      “Well, how you gonna have an adventure like that, if you’re too scared to get in the river?”
      Emma didn’t say nothing.
      “And what if you fell off the pirate ship?” asked Pearl.
      “Or they made you walk the plank,” I added.  “Then you’d be really glad you knew how to swim.”
      Emma scowled.  “I’m not really planning on becoming a pirate,” she said.  But she took her shoes and socks off just the same.
      We all walked into the water, ‘til it was about up to our waists.  Pearl offered Emma her hand; I expected her to refuse, but Emma clutched it like she was afraid she was gonna drift away.  
      “You gotta push your skirt under,” said Pearl, “’til it’s nice and wet and stays there.  Otherwise, it’ll just float around you and make things harder.”
      “It’s cold,” said Emma.
      “That’s swimming,” said Pearl.
      Emma was pushing her skirt under, when suddenly, she screamed and lost her balance.  I had to grab her arm to prevent her from falling under.  “Get it off, get it off!” Emma screamed.
      “What?” I asked.
      She held up her foot, hopping on one leg.  There was nothing on it.
      “Something crawled across my toes.”
	Pearl nodded.  “Probably, a crawdad.”
	“What’s that?” asked Emma.
	“Like a little lobster.  I told you about them.”
	Took us a while to calm Emma down, but we finally did and I showed Emma how to move her arms in the water.  “Like you’re digging with your hands,” I explained.  I tried to get her to float on her belly, and lift her head to breath, and kick her feet too, but it was all just too much.  
	“If I could just see what was in the water,” said Emma.
	“Wouldn’t help you a bit,” I said.  “Wouldn’t seeing all the fish and worms, just make things worse?”
	Emma didn’t answer.
	Finally, I gave up trying to teach Emma real swimming and Pearl just showed her how to doggy paddle.  Emma kind of got that.  Even went in up to the neck, lifted her feet, and paddled around.  
	It was getting late in the afternoon as we all walked home, letting the hot August sun dry us off.  “I kind of liked swimming,” said Emma, which surprised me, since she’d spend all afternoon complaining.  “Though not as much as baseball.”
	When we got home, Mama and Mrs. Walker were waiting on our front porch with a strange man in a suit I’d never seen before.
	“There you three are,” said Mama.  “We’ve been waiting for you.”  She turned to the man beside her.  “This here’s Mr. Rich.  He’s from the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission.”
	The man nodded politely at us.  “We’re trying to wipe out hookworm infestations, so common in these rural communities.”  
      “I don’t have worms, sir,” Emma said politely.  “I always wear shoes.”  
      He looked pointedly at her bare feet and the shoes in her hand.
      Emma blushed and muttered, “They were teaching me to swim.”
      That’s when I noticed that Mrs. Walker was holding a jar and Mama was holding two.
      The man cleared his throat.  “We’ll just need a stool sample from everyone in town under the age of 18.  Unless, you always wear shoes.  Then you couldn’t have caught them.”
      Mama held out a jar to me and gestured towards the outhouse.
      “You want me to poop here in this jar?” I asked.
      Pearl giggled.
      “Well, yes,” said the man.  
      “I’d rather not,” I said, and made to hand the jar back to Mama.
      “Dit,” Mama said sharply.  “Best do as the man asks.”
      “Eweee!” said Pearl, but she picked up her own jar.
      Emma took the jar from her mama, but whispered to me before she stormed off, “If I have worms I’m gonna kill you.”
      She didn’t of course.  But pretty much every other kid in town did.  Every evening for a week after dinner, Mama gave me and Pearl and my brothers a huge, chalky white pill.  At the end of the week, I swallowed my pride along with the last pill and picked out a pair of old loafers from the barrel in the kitchen. 
      “Finally,” Mama said with a smile.  “That Emma girl’s starting to rub off.”
      






