 14 – TRAPPING RABBITS 

	Late that August, I came up with a plan to make money for the 4th hunt.  I would catch rabbits and sell them to people in town.  Rabbits were a cheap way of serving meat on Sunday.  I figured people would pay 10-20 cents for a big swamp rabbit.
	Swamp rabbits are just like regular old cottontails, ‘cept they’re bigger and like to swim.  They have real thick, dark brown fur.  Most rabbits won’t go into the water, ‘less they’re forced, but a swamp rabbit will dive under just for fun and swim along with only its little nose peaking up out of the water.  The broom sage patch near the river (the one me and Emma had cut through after the buzzard) had a whole mess of rabbits, so I went down there to set up my snares.
	Most people set snares that choke and kill a rabbit.  Those are easy to set, but make the meat tough, since the rabbits tend to struggle a bit before they die.  I came up with a special snare that would squeeze shut only enough to trap the rabbit, keeping it alive ‘til you were ready to eat it.  Then it was just a quick snap to break its neck, and you had fresh meat for supper.  
	Two days later I went back to the broom sage patch to check my snares.  No rabbits.  That was unusual, but it took a couple of days for the human smell to fade from the thin wire I used.  Maybe I hadn’t waited long enough.
	So two days later I came back again.  Still no rabbits.  When I looked closer, I realized all my traps had been sprung.  I had caught something, but it had escaped.  Wasn’t even a tuff of hair left behind.  That was mighty strange.  I reset my snares and dreamed of huge, bald rabbits that would fetch 50 cents apiece.
	When three days later I still hadn’t caught nothing, I was beginning to get frustrated.  Had the rabbits gone someplace else?  Had I forgotten how to set a snare?  Late that afternoon me and Emma were drinking root beer in our cave when I mentioned that there didn’t seem to be no rabbits around this year.
	“What are you talking about?” said Emma.  “I’ve seen lots of them.”
	“Where?” I asked.
	“Over in the broom sage patch by the river.”
	“What?”
	“They were trapped in some old wire.  I untangled them and let them go.”
	“You let them go?”
	“Of course.”  
      “That was my 4th hunt money!”
	Emma looked at me blankly.  “You trapped those rabbits?”
	I nodded.
	“Oh, Dit, I don’t think you should do that.”
	“We’ll it ain’t up to you.”
	“Those rabbits are so small and defenseless.”
	“They’re food!”
	Emma shook her head.  “I don’t want you trapping them anymore.”
	“That ain’t fair, Emma.” I was yelling now.  “I’ve spent all summer showing you around Moundville.  Teaching you to swim and dig a cave and throw stones and play baseball.  You can’t just come down here and tell me all the things we do to have fun and earn money are wrong.”
	“Fine,” said Emma.  She put down her soda and crawled out of the cave.  I kicked the bottle over and watch the soda fizz out into the dirt.  It didn’t make me feel any better.
	So I waited until I was sure she was gone, and I went down to the Black Warrior to throw some stones.
	I threw stones for a long time, ‘til my arm began to ache and I wasn’t mad no more.  I liked being friends with Emma.  And now I’d gone and ruined it over some stupid rabbits.  But the 4th hunt wasn’t stupid – not to me – so I wasn’t sure what I could’ve done different.  
	I felt her come up and stand beside me.  Saw her throw a couple of stones into the water until I finally turned to look at her.
	“What do you want?”
	“You’re right,” Emma said quietly.
	“What?” I asked, confused.
	“I’m sorry.  I shouldn’t tell you what to do.  Mama always said I’d have more friends if I weren’t so bossy.”
	I hadn’t expected her to apologize.  Chip never did that.  I threw a few more stones.  “You ain’t so bad.”
	“It’s just… I had a pet rabbit up in Boston.  Used to keep her in a cage under our front porch.  I had to give her away when we moved down here.”
	“Oh.”
	“I didn’t have a lot of friends in Boston, Dit, even though there were tons of kids around.  Sometimes, that little rabbit was the only one I could talk to.”
	“Oh.”
	“But I know people eat them, down South.  They served them at the potluck at our church.  So I guess I can’t say there’s anything wrong with you trapping them.” 
	I nodded in thanks, unsure what I was supposed to say.  We threw a few more stones, then walked home without talking.  
	But even though Emma had given me her blessing, I felt differently about rabbits after that.  Thinking about her alone, in the skinny row house, talking to her pet rabbit, well it made me feel kind of sad.  So the next day I gathered up my snares.  I’d still eat rabbit stew if my mama served it, but I’d have to find another way to earn money for the 4th hunt.









