 16 – I CALL EMMA A LIAR 

      The night before the first day of school, we all took a bath.  Used the same tub we used for the laundry, and it took just as long to fill.  For hours we boiled pots of water on the wood stove in the kitchen.  We filled the tub twice, once for the boys and once for the girls.  When we were all scrubbed clean, we laid out our clothes.  Mama inspected them, making sure they were ironed and had no loose buttons.  I had new pants, a new handkerchief, and the old leather loafers from the barrel.  
      For breakfast Mama made sausage and eggs and grits and biscuits and let us smear butter and honey all over them.  Della, Ollie, Ulman, and Elman went to the high school.  Raymond, me, Earl and Pearl walked to Mrs. Seay’s grammar school, two blocks away.  Robert and Lois were too little for school, and they always cried on the first day ‘cause they had to stay home with Mama.
      I threw my book satchel over my shoulder and took off, leaving Raymond to walk with the twins.  I liked to get there early and throw rocks at the two chestnut trees right next to the schoolhouse.  That’d bring the chestnuts crashing down around my head.  Had quite a pile collected before Mrs. Seay rang the bell and we all shuffled inside.
      The schoolhouse was one room with wooden floors and a coal stove in the front for the winter.  There were rows of two-person wooden desks and a big aisle down the middle of the room.  Boys sat on the right and girls on the left; little kids were in the front and the older ones in the back.  At the front of the room was a chalkboard and the teacher’s desk.
      Mrs. Seay wore a blue silk dress and her pearl necklace.  A matching blue hat sat on her head.  The whole outfit didn’t seem too practical to me, since Mr. Summons usually ended up covered in chalk by the end of the day.  But if the President of the United States stopped by and invited her to dinner, Mrs. Seay would be ready to go.  
      We all stood in a line in front of her, waiting to register for the year.  Just ahead of me was Bobby.  His pa had run off a long time ago leaving his mama with seven kids to raise alone.  Even though we were the same age, his mama was so poor Bobby had to work all summer in the fields.  Like I’d told Pa, he was now a shade or two darker than Elbert, though his blonde hair was even paler than it’d been last time I’d seen him in June.  His overalls were clean, but the knees were full of holes.  He didn’t carry nothing, not even a pen.
      “Good morning,” said Mrs. Seay as she moved her ruler down her role book.
      Bobby swallowed hard.  “Morning ma’am.”  
      “What’s your name?”
      “Bobby.”
      “What’s your real name, son?”
      “Bobby.”
      “I see.”  Mrs. Seay scribbled something on her list.  
      Bobby looked at the floor.  “I ain’t got the tuition money yet.  My mama don’t get paid ‘til next week.”  
      “Bring it next week then.”
      “Thank you, ma’am.”  Bobby went and took a seat.  
      I was next in line.  I held out the tuition money and smiled as she looked me over.  
      “You must be Harry Otis Sims,” said Mrs. Seay as she took my money.  She had dimples when she smiled.
      “Yes, ma’am.  But everybody calls me Dit”  
       “I hear you’ve got a good arm on you, Dit.”
      I gulped, “Uhh, yes ma’am.”
      She made another note in her book.  “When you’re playing ball at recess, please try not to break any windows.”  She slapped her palm with the ruler and her smile suddenly seemed a little forced.  I felt my face flush and stared at my shoes.  
      I was so intent on getting back to my desk, I didn’t see Mary’s big old foot sticking out in the aisle.  I tripped, dropping all my supplies.  My bottle of black ink smashed on the floor, spraying me with little black dots.  Everyone laughed.
      I boiled up with anger as I wiped up the mess with my new handkerchief.  Emma had told!  After she’d promised not to.  After I had spent all those hours teaching her to throw a baseball.  My head started to pound.  I wanted to hit someone.  I might have too, ‘cept Chip sat down next to me.
      Chip Davidson was my best friend since third grade.  Me and Chip always shared a desk.  Chip was handsome and popular at school, with golden brown hair and eyes as green as emeralds.  (Least that was the way my sisters described him.  Tell me, which one of them had ever seen an emerald?  But I guess, eyes as green as pond scum, just don’t sound as nice.)  There weren’t no freckles on Chip’s perfect nose and his teeth were so white and straight, when he smiled he fooled everyone into thinking he was a perfect angel.
      They were wrong, of course.  Chip’s pa was the mayor of Moundville, which meant he could get away with stuff no one would put up with from anybody else.  Once we accidentally set Dr. Griffith’s shed on fire and I expected to end up with a whipping, but Chip talked so pretty, Mayor Davidson offered to pay for the shed and the whole incident was forgotten.
      “Sure am glad to see you again, Dit,” said Chip.  “It was boring as sin down in Selma with my grandma.  My mama’s so scared of the ‘big city,’ she barely let me out the front door.”
      “So what’d you do all day?”  I asked, happy to think of something besides the little black stains on my new pants.
      “Played dominoes with my cousins.”   
      “That’s it?”
      “Well, once my older brother snuck me into the pool hall.  But my grandma caught us ‘fore we could finish even one game.”
      “Too bad.”  Wasn’t sure I believed him about the pool hall.  Chip’s been known to exaggerate.
      “So what about you, Dit?” asked Chip.  “Heard a family of Negras moved in next door.”
      I shrugged.  “It ain’t so bad.” 
       “‘Course Dit don’t think it’s bad,” said Bobby, sitting alone behind us.  “He’s in love with their girl!”
      “No I ain’t!”  
      “My brother says you always running around with her,” Bobby said.
      “No,” I lied.
      Chip grinned.  “Dit’s got a girlfriend!”
      “Shut up.”  I tried to ignore them, but they kept chanting, “Girlfriend, girlfriend.”
      For the first time ever, I was glad when the teacher stood up and made us start learning.  
      After school, me and Chip walked home, talking about baseball and laughing.  I didn’t even notice Emma ‘til she was right up next to me.  “Hi, Dit,” she said.  “Guess what happened to me today.”  
      I didn’t answer.  Chip took a long look at Emma, then poked me in the ribs. 
      “The teacher made a mistake in a long division problem,” Emma continued.  “I pointed it out and instead of thanking me, she scolded me for speaking out of turn!  I think you’re right, Dit.  I don’t think I’m going to like that Wilson school.”
      I didn’t say nothing.  Chip snickered and made kissing sounds.  I jabbed him with my elbow and he shut up.  
      Emma looked at Chip, then back at me.  “Is something wrong?”
      “You told Mrs. Seay I threw stones at her house!”  Soon as I said it, I felt like a fool.  All afternoon I’d been telling myself, talk to her softly, sometime when you’re alone.  But then when she embarrassed me by being my friend in front of Chip, it just came bursting out.
      “You threw stones at Mrs. Seay’s house?” Chip asked.
      “I did not,” Emma stated firmly.
      I snorted.  “Mrs. Seay said to me, ‘Be sure not to break no more windows.’  How else would she know?” 
      “I didn’t tell,” Emma protested.  “I promised not to.”
      “Your promise ain’t worth a dang!”  Then I spit in the dirt.  
      Emma’s face swelled up like an insect bite.  I thought for sure she was gonna burst into tears, but she just picked up her skirt and ran off in the opposite direction.  
      Me and Chip watched her go.  “You threw stones at Mrs. Seay’s house?” he asked again.
      “Yeah,” I admitted.
      “And the nigger girl knew about it?”
      I just kicked at the dirt.  Chip knew I hung out with Elbert during the summer, and he had never called him a nigger.  I wanted to tell him not to call Emma that, but the words just wouldn’t come out.  
      “I gotta go home now,” I said.
      Chip nodded.  He knew I had chores after school, and I knew he didn’t.  
      “See you tomorrow,” I said and ran off.
      That evening as we were getting ready for bed, I told Raymond what had happened.  He just shook his head.  “Well, shoot Dit, everyone knows you’ve got the best arm in town.  And you did break Dr. Griffith’s window last year playing ball.  Word gets around.”
      He was right.  People had teased me for months about that.  I had forgotten.  “Maybe Emma didn’t tell,” said Raymond.
      I had a sinking feeling he was right.  






