 17 – FUN AND GAMES	

      The more I thought about it, the surer I was that Emma hadn’t told.  Who would she have blabbed my secret to?  I didn’t think she had any other friends.  But I didn’t do nothing about it, not even when I saw Emma on the way to school the next morning.  I wanted to call out to her, but before I could think of what to say, she turned on her heel and ran away, fast as a spooked rabbit.
      I trudged into school and sat down next to Chip.  When Mrs. Seay was busy up front helping the little kids with their reading, I turned to him and said, “I ain’t seeing that Negra girl no more.”
      “’Course you ain’t,” said Chip, pretending to work on his arithmetic assignment.  “’Cause you got your eyes closed when you’re kissing her.”
      Behind us, Bobby snorted and chuckled.
      “I’m serious, Chip.”
      “I know.  Kissing is serious business.”
      Bobby just laughed harder.
      I turned to look at Bobby.  “What’s so funny?”
      “You are,” said Bobby.
      “Shut up!”
      Mrs. Seay looked up then.  “There’s a lot of talking going on.”  She looked around the room and caught my eye.  “Dit, stand up please.”
      I scrambled to my feet.
      “Is there something wrong?” Mrs. Seay asked.  
      “No, ma’am.”  I looked her straight in the eye, feeling my face burning up like a kettle left on a stove after it’s boiled dry.
      “Good.  Please get back to your arithmetic.”
      “Yes, ma’am.”  I sat back down and looked at my math book.  Chip had drawn little hearts over half the problems so I couldn’t read the numbers.
      “Chip!” I hissed.
      “Just tell Mrs. Seay you couldn’t do your work ‘cause you were blinded by love.”
      “I ain’t in love with her!”
      “That’s what my brother said,” chimed in Bobby.  “Right before he got married.”
      They burst into laughter.  Mrs. Seay turned around and glared, but didn’t say nothing to them.  I ground my teeth and pretended to concentrate on my work.
      
      At recess, things just got worse.  Chip and Bobby wanted to play marbles, so I drew a big circle in the dirt.  We put our marbles in the middle, then took turns flicking our shooters into the circle.  If your shooter pushes another marble out of the circle, you get to keep that marble and go again.  The person who ends up with the most marbles wins.  
      Everything was okay at first, ‘til I won the first game.  We ain’t supposed to gamble at school, but we had each bet a nickel.  This meant I had won 10 cents.  Chip smiled and said, “Now you can buy something for your sweetie.”
      “Dit’s got a sweetheart!  Dit’s got a sweetheart!” chanted Bobby.
      “Hush up, Bobby,” I said.  “Let’s just play another game.”
      So we did.  But every time my shooter hit a marble out of the circle, Chip puckered up his lips and made kissing noises.  
      “That’s seventeen kisses!” Bobby exclaimed.
      “Come on, stop it.”  This just made the guys laugh harder.  I glanced over, looking for my brothers.  Raymond and Earl were way off over by a tree playing catch.  Pearl was watching the marble game, but I couldn’t exactly ask her for help without making things even worse.  So I figured I’d just have to join in.
      “Fine, I admit it.”  I threw my hands up in the air.  “I sure do love that Negra.  Watch out Emma, here’s kiss number eighteen!”  
      The boys roared with laughter.
      I flicked my shooter and knocked two more of their marbles out of the circle.  “Nineteen and twenty.  My, those kisses are fine!” I cried, loud as can be.
      Bobby was laughing so hard he started to hiccup.
      “How about a hug now?” I went on.  “Smooch, smooch, smooch!”
      Chip had tears in his eyes.  “Oh Dit,” Chip cried.  “You are just too funny!”
      But when I glanced over at Pearl, she wasn’t laughing.
      
      On the way home, it seemed the Emma-joke had finally grown stale.  Me and Bobby didn’t have much to say, so Chip turned his attention to Pearl’s best friend, Mary.  Mary was a sweet girl, ‘though not the quickest in school.  She was especially bad at spelling.  Mary and Pearl were just ahead of us when Chip started in.  “That was sure a fun spelling bee this afternoon.”
      “Sure was,” Bobby said. 
      “Whole bunch of easy words.  Like ‘bake,’” said Chip.
      ‘Course that was one of the words Mary had gotten wrong.
      “And ‘why,’” added Bobby.
      Mary had spelled it W-H-I-Y.
      Pearl turned around to look at me.  I just shook my head.  She put her arm around Mary, and the two girls started to walk faster.
      “Though there were some hard words too,” said Chip.  “Like ‘Mary.’”  
      I knew where this was going.  We had played the same joke on little Isabelle last year.  
      “I know how to spell, ‘Mary,’” Bobby said.  “S-T-U-P-I-D.”
      Pearl looked at me again.  I had to say something.  Mary was staring at the ground.
      “Knock it off, Bobby,” I said.
      They ignored me.  
      “Mary?” said Chip.  “I thought it was D-U-M-B.”
      “You’re gonna make her cry,” I warned.
      Sure enough, soon as I said it, Mary started crying.
      “Now look what you did, Dit!” scolded Chip.  “Shame on you.”
      “Me!  It was you.”
      Chip shrugged.  “It’s just fun and games.”  He pointed to Mary.  “Even Mary knows that.”  
      Mary nodded, even as she kept crying.  Pearl sat down with her by the side of the road as me, Chip, and Bobby walked on by.
      It had been my idea last year to spell Isabelle I-D-I-O-T.  I remembered laughing as she cried.  But this year it didn’t seem funny.  And I finally realized that the idiot had been me.
      





