 23 – EASY AS BREATHING

      We went back to Emma’s house and told her mama that I had slipped on some rocks and stubbed my toe.  Mrs. Walker had worked as a practical nurse in Boston and she’d started giving out teas and salves in Moundville too.  People said she had magic in her fingers.  It was true – a cut she dressed healed twice as fast as normal.  I’d of thought Dr. Griffith would’ve been jealous, but he seemed to like Mrs. Walker.  Sometimes they even traded remedies for ringworm or whooping cough.  
      Mrs. Walker clucked over me for a while and made me wash my foot with soap and water.  “That’s the strangest looking stubbed toe I’ve ever seen,” she said, but I guess she bought our story, ‘cause she didn’t ask any more questions.  Just put some iodine on my wound, gave us some milk and biscuits, and left us alone.  
      I collected my mitt, an old bat, and my twine baseball and led Emma back into the woods.  We picked a small clearing in the shadow of a mound and I handed her the bat.  
      To me, baseball was as easy as breathing, but Emma didn’t even know how to hold the bat.  I had to think real hard before I could explain it to her.  “Hold your hands closer together,” I told her finally, “And bend your knees.”  
      When Emma was holding the bat in a way that didn’t look too awful, I took a couple of steps back, picked up the twine ball, and threw it towards her.  She panicked, swung way too soon, and stepped right into the path of the ball.  It hit her in the side with a loud thump.  Tears welled up in her eyes and she sat down on the ground.  
      Our lesson was over.
      The next day after school, we tried again.  Emma flinched and ran anytime I threw the ball anywhere near her.  “What’s wrong?” I asked.  “Are you scared of the ball?”
      “Yes,” Emma answered and pulled up her shirt.  She had a huge bruise on her ribs from the day before.
      “You can’t play baseball if you’re scared,” I pointed out.  “Guess I’m gonna have to teach you how to watch the ball.”
      “I know how to watch the ball,” Emma said.
      “No you don’t.  You got to be able to sense where the ball is,” I explained.  “And if you can do that, you won’t get hit.”
      “How are you going to teach me that?” asked Emma.
      I thought for a moment.  “All you have to do is stand still.  I’m gonna throw the ball to one side of you or the other.  You yell ‘left’ or ‘right’ depending on which side the ball passes.”
      “I don’t need any more bruises.”
      “I ain’t gonna hit you, Emma.” 
      “You promise?”
      “I promise.  Don’t you trust me?”
      Emma nodded.
      “All right then.  Let’s play ball.” 
      At first, Emma just stood there looking confused.  I kept throwing.  Right, left, left, left, right.  Then, when she finally started believing I wasn’t gonna hit her, she guessed, calling out “right” and “left” more or less at random.  Pretty soon, she was getting more right than wrong.  A couple of days later, we moved onto picking up the bat.
      About the time Emma’s bruise began to fade, Mrs. Seay decided we should learn the capitals of all 48 states.  Instead of half-paying attention, I forced myself to copy them carefully into my notebook.  Then I asked Emma for help.  She suggested we combine our projects.
      I’d step up to the mound and Emma would ask, “Pennsylvania?”
      “Harrisburg,” I’d answer, then throw the ball.  She’d swing and miss.
      “New York?” she asked.
      “Albany,” I answered.  I pitched.  She swung and missed.
      “Massachusetts?”
      “Boston.”
      Emma smiled.  And ‘cause she was smiling, she forgot to think.  I pitched, she swung, and we both jumped at the crack when the bat connected with the ball.  
      






