 24 – I MAKE DOC HALEY REAL, REAL MAD

      The next afternoon we took a break from baseball, so I could get my hair cut by Doc Haley.  I was supposed to sing in the church choir on Sunday and Mama wanted me to look nice.  Elbert came out of the back room and asked me if I wanted to go fishing when I was done.  “Sure,” I said.  “Why don’t you swing by Emma’s and see if she wants to go too?”
      “Never mind,” he said, “Got some chores I should take care of.”  He let the door slam on his way out.
      Doc Haley looked up when the bells jangled, but he didn’t say nothing.
      “You think it’s a bad thing I’m friends with Emma?” I asked.
      Doc snipped at a piece of my hair.  “It ain’t bad,” he said slowly.  
      “Elbert don’t like her much,” I said.  “I don’t think you do neither.”
      He shook his head.  “I like Emma just fine.  It’s just…”  Doc shrugged.  “No good’s ever come of a white boy hanging around a Negra girl.”
      “You talking about Elbert’s grandpa?”  I asked.  
      Doc froze, just as Elbert had done, and I remembered I’d promised not to say nothing.  But surely Doc knew ‘bout his own daddy.  
      “Where’d you hear about that?” he asked, his voice serious and cold.  
      Before I could think up a good lie, the front door jingled and Big Foot stepped into the store.  Doc put down his scissors and wiped his hands on his white apron.  “Afternoon, Mr. Big Foot, sir.  What can I do for you today?  Shoe shine?”
      Big Foot headed straight to the shelf, picked up a bottle of hair tonic, and put it in his pocket.  Then he walked back to the door.
      “Big Foot?”  I called out from the chair.
      He paused in the doorway.  “What, Dit?”
      “You forgot to pay for that,” I said.
      Big Foot’s cheeks turned as red as his nose, and I noticed a fine white scar down the left side of his face.  He was completely clean-shaven, except for a few bristles sprouting out on each side of that scar.
      “No sir,” said Doc quickly.  “The boy’s mistaken.  That tonic’s a gift to you.”
      Big Foot grunted and fished a quarter out of his pocket.  He threw it into a bowl on Doc Haley’s counter.  “You mind your own business, Dit,” he growled and strolled out of the store.
      Doc Haley snatched the towel from my neck and shook it out, even though he wasn’t finished with my haircut.  Little flecks of my red hair stuck to the tile floor like bits of dried blood.
      “What the heck you think you’re doing?” he asked in an angry whisper.  
      “He was trying to steal from you.”
      “He’s stole from me for twenty years,” Doc snapped.  “It’s no concern of yours.”
      “I’m sorry.” 
      “You be careful, Dit.  Big Foot killed a man in Selma.”
      “Really?”  
      “In a bar fight.  Claimed it was an accident, but everyone knew it wasn’t.”  Doc Haley glared at me.  A vein was pulsing on the side of his head.  I ain’t never seen him so angry.  
      “I said I was sorry.”
      “Sorry don’t help, Dit, if somebody ends up dead.”  He took one of the towels he used for giving shaves, soaked it in a bowl of cool water, and pressed it to his temples.  “You’d best get along home now.”  
      I slid slowly off the big chair.  On the way home, I thought about what Doc had said about Big Foot.  The sheriff did have a temper.  He had fists the size of Mama’s apple pie pans.  And the scar on his cheek I had never noticed before.  I suppose it was possible that Big Foot had killed a man.  And I wasn’t sure if I should be impressed or scared.
       
       






