 3 – DOING THE WASH

	After breakfast, I did my chores.  All of us kids have jobs, ‘cept little Robert and Lois who are only four and two.  Mine are to bring coal into the house, chop wood, drive the cows to pasture in the morning and bring them home in the evening.  We always have at least three cows, so we’ll have enough milk and butter.  Our main pasture is across the railroad tracks and those stupid cows always stop right over the iron rails.  I have to beat the cows with a switch to get them to move on.  Raymond is our main milker.  He’s 14 and everybody says I look just like him, ‘cept my hair is red and his is brown.  He’s a bit taller and his nose is bigger and I’m much better looking, but other than that, we could be twins.    
      The morning after Emma came, I had finished my chores and was getting ready to go off hunting when Mama asked me to come help with the washing.  ‘Course it wasn’t a request, it was an order, but grown-ups like to pretend they are being all reasonable even when they ain’t.  Washing was usually Della and Ollie’s job.  They’re 19 and 17 and just about all grown up.  Mama said they were both in bed ‘cause their friend had come to visit.  Now I don’t get to stay in bed when my friends come over, but when I told Mama that, she told me to stop being fresh and go outside.  
      Ten-year-old Earl and Pearl had been drafted into helping too.  They really are twins, but are as alike as a chicken and a chipmunk.  Earl’s the chipmunk, quiet and watching everything, while Pearl’s the one poking her beak into everybody’s business.  I felt a little better when I saw them helping because I hate doing the washing.  Stirring that stupid old pot ‘til your hands go numb.  Rubbing all the water out on the wringer ‘til your fingers are as wrinkled as the wet sheets.  It is almost as bad as churning butter, and even Mama agrees that is the worst chore of all. 
      The wash pot is huge and we have to pull up every bucket of water from our well.  Pearl was pulling as fast as she could, but it would take forever if I let her do it.  I grabbed the rope and began to yank it like the halter of a stubborn mule.  The bucket came up over the lip of the well and sloshed a mouthful of water all over Pearl.  I laughed as she wiped at her face with her skirt.
      Earl was trying to keep the huge fire going under the big black pot.  It took a lot of heat to boil all that water.  It seemed like I had pulled up about a hundred buckets (and spilled two more of them on Pearl) by the time Mama came out of the house.  She was balancing a huge load of sheets on her hip.  Even after ten kids, Mama’s long hair was still brown – mostly – and though her hands were wrinkled, her eyes were sharp.  I thought she was real pretty, even if she wasn’t skinny like Mrs. Walker.
      While we were working, Emma was sitting on her front porch, lazing about.  This irked me no end.  So I came up with a plan.  “Traveling you sure do get dusty,” I said in a loud voice.
      Mama ignored me.   
      “Remember how you used to share the washing with the last postmaster’s wife?  Be nice to do that again.”  I admit, I was sassing her a little.  But I didn’t care who helped, long as it wasn’t me.  “Bet the new neighbors have a whole mess of clothes to wash.”
      Mama glared at me and threw the sheets into the pot.  Earl stirred them with an old broom handle.  Pearl whispered, “They is Negras, Dit.”
      Mama glanced over at the cabin.  Emma sat in her rocking chair, watching us.
      “Your mama home?” Mama called over to Emma.
      “Yes.”  Emma glided back and forth in her chair like she was bored.
      “Tell her I’d like to speak to her.”
      Took Emma a minute to get up, as if she was thinking of disobeying Mama, but finally she disappeared into the house.  Pearl’s eyes got as big as a hoot owls.  “Our clothes are gonna end up all black and dirty,” she said.
      “Hush child,” said Mama.
      Mrs. Walker came out of the house, drying her hands on a white starched apron.  “Did you want something, Mrs. Sims?”
      Mama rubbed her hands on the front of her own dirty dress.  Earl forgot to stir.  Mama said, “I was wondering, Mrs. Walker, if you wanted to do some laundry.”
      “Excuse me?”  Mrs. Walker arched her eyebrows.
      “Thursday’s wash day, around here,” Mama explained.
      “Mrs. Sims, I am not your maid.”
      “What?” asked Mama.
       “Just because we’re renting this house from you does not mean you can order me around.”  Mrs. Walker sounded like she was talking to a small child.
      Mama rubbed a soapy hand across her forehead.  “But...” 
      “Why’s this so hard for you to understand?  I’m not doing your wash!”
      I started to laugh.  “My mama ain’t asking you to do the washing,” I said.
      Mama turned as red as one of the tomatoes in the garden.  “Hush, Dit!  If Mrs. Walker don’t want to wash her clothes with ours, that’s fine.  Just more work for her.”
      Mama walked back towards the pot, grabbed the broom handle from Earl, and began stirring furiously.  
      Emma took a step forward.  “You mean, you wanted to do it together?” she asked.
      “That’s what I said, ain’t it?”  Mama answered.  She continued to stir.
      Mrs. Walker pursed her lips.  “Our clothes are rather dusty from the trip,” she admitted.
      Mama gave a weak smile.  “Dit, you can go now.”  
      I grinned.  My plan had worked.  
      “But why don’t you show Emma around, while me and Mrs. Walker wash the clothes.”
      Not quite as I had expected.  “But Pearl…”
      “Pearl’s got to change her clothes,” Mama said without looking at me.  “Someone got her all wet filling the laundry tub.”
      Now Mama looked at me and I knew I was stuck with Emma.
      Emma didn’t seem too pleased either.  She folded her arms across her chest.  “I didn’t play with white boys in Boston.” 
      “Well, darling,” Mama said, “things is a little bit different down here.”	







