 35 – I OVERHEAR A CONVERSATION

      We ran all the way home to tell Mama and Mrs. Walker the good news.  The play had been retitled, The Famous African Princess Circus, and Emma was gonna be the ringmaster.  I was gonna be the lion tamer and Mrs. Seay had told Bobby he still had to be the lion.
      But Mama and Mrs. Walker were not as pleased as we expected.  In fact, Mrs. Walker took Emma’s arm and marched her inside, saying something about it being time for supper.  But Mr. Walker didn’t get home ‘til six and it wasn’t even four-thirty.  I asked Mama if we were eating early too and she just shook her head.  At eight Emma came over and asked me to tell Mrs. Seay her mama didn’t want her in the play.
      
      Mrs. Seay frowned when I delivered Emma’s message, but she didn’t say nothing.  Didn’t even make us practice the play.  I was almost happy to get back to math and reading, long as it meant I didn’t have to struggle through the ringmaster’s lines.
      That evening I was at Emma’s writing out my spelling words, when there was a knock at the door.  Mrs. Walker put down her sewing and went to answer it.  It was Mrs. Seay.  Mrs. Walker led her into the parlor and shut the door.  I glanced at Emma and without a word, we both slid off our chairs and put our ears to the door.  
      Now I don’t try to listen to other people’s conversations.  I know it ain’t polite.  But sometimes what they are saying is so dang interesting, it’s not my fault if I accidentally-on-purpose listen in.
      “Did you read the essay Emma wrote?” I heard Mrs. Seay say through the door.
      “No,” answered Mrs. Walker.
      “You didn’t help her with it at all?”
      “I didn’t know she was writing it.”
      “It was better than the work of students twice her age.  Why she almost had me convinced that losing the war was a good thing - and I’m a southern girl, born and bred.”
      “Emma’s not going to be in the play.  I thought she asked Dit to tell you.  I’m sorry you came all this way.”
      “Did you hear what I just said?” asked Mrs. Seay.
      “Yes.  Did you hear me?”  Mrs. Walker’s voice was cold.  They sat in silence for a long moment.  
      “I can’t believe I’m asking this,” Mrs. Seay said slowly, “but please let your daughter be in our play.”  
      “I can’t.”
      “Why not?”
      “You wouldn’t understand.”
      “Don’t you think it’s hard for me to ask a Negra for help?” Mrs. Seay snapped.
      We heard Mrs. Walker stand up and march towards the door.  Me and Emma scrambled quickly back to the table.
      “Mrs. Walker, I don’t always say the right thing,” Mrs. Seay called out.  “But most of us in Alabama, we’re not bad people.”  
      Mrs. Walker must have had her hand on the doorknob, ‘cause it started to turn.  Me and Emma pretended to concentrate on our homework.  “Tell that to the poor Negro who was lynched in Jefferson County last month,” we heard Mrs. Walker call out.
      “I said most of us.  Not all.”
      There was a long pause.  “So what are you proposing?” Mrs. Walker said finally.  
      “I’ve never worked with a Negra child before,” Mrs. Seay said brightly, “but I can’t see how she’s so much different than the rest.  The play is supposed to go on in less than a month.  No one knows the lines except Emma.”
      “No.”
      “Fine.  Then you tell her she can’t play the role because she’s a Negra.”
      Emma grinned and squeezed my hand.  That was the one thing Mrs. Walker would never do.  And sure enough, the next morning Mrs. Walker told Emma she had changed her mind.  
      






