 39 – DOC HALEY TAKES A STAND

	I’d seen a person knocked out before – Ulman was thrown off a horse a couple of summers ago – but he woke up right away.  Doc just moaned a little as Dr. Griffith, Pa and Raymond carried him back to the Walker’s cabin.  Me and Earl helped Emma home.  I expected her mama to start hollering when she saw us, but I guess someone’d run ahead to warn her because she just pursed her lips and hurried us inside.  
	Pa and Raymond lay Doc Haley down on the couch in the parlor.  Mrs. Walker didn’t say nothing, not even when they got blood on her good sofa.  	
      Dr. Griffith sat Emma down on a chair in the kitchen.  He had to put in five stitches to close the gash in her forehead and she didn’t make a sound.  But when Dr. Griffith finished sewing and went into the parlor to tend to Doc Haley, Emma finally started bawling.  “Oh Mama,” she sobbed.  “I’m not going to be in the play.”  Mrs. Walker put her arms around her and let her cry.
	Doc Haley was hurt bad.  His left arm was broken, he had two black eyes, a split lip, a twisted ankle, couple of bruised ribs, and a lump on his head the size of an old twine baseball.  Dr. Griffith set the arm, bandaged the ankle, stitched the lip and put a raw steak over his eyes.
	“There’s not much else I can do,” Dr. Griffith told Mrs. Walker.  “Those ribs’ll hurt like hell when we wakes up.”
	“I have a poultice,” Mrs. Walker said.
	Dr. Griffith nodded.  He glanced at me and Emma, then silently went out the door.

	That night there was a meeting on the Walker’s front porch.  Dr. Griffith and Pa were there, as well as the Reverend Cannon from the Negra church and a couple of Mr. Walker’s friends.  They even let Elbert sit in, but me and Emma were told to stay in the kitchen.  
	‘Course as soon as they closed the door, we slid off our chairs and put our ears to the door.  Didn’t really need to sit that close, ‘cause Dr. Griffith was practically yelling.
	“Absolutely not!  He’s in no condition to be moved.”
	“Big Foot find him again, he’ll be a whole lot worse,” said one of Mr. Walker’s friends.
	“Elbert,” the reverend said quietly.  “You have any kin up North?”
	“A cousin in Chicago.”  Elbert sounded scared and that scared me.  	
      Didn’t hear what the reverend said then, because Doc Haley came out of the parlor.  He was no longer bloody, but he looked awful, with dark bruises springing up all over his face.  “Are they talking about me?” he asked in a whisper, clutching the doorframe with his good arm.
	I nodded.
	Doc took a deep breath, then started limping towards the front door.  Emma jumped up to help him.  “Open it,” he said to me.
	I threw the front door wide open.  
      Everyone turned to look at Doc Haley, standing in the doorway.  “I ain’t going no where,” he said finally.
	“But Pa,” Elbert started to argue.
	“I own the shop free and clear and the field behind it too.  It’s my land and my home.”  He looked tired then.  Almost lost his balance and had to lean on me and Emma for support.  “I ain’t going no where.”
      The reverend shook his head.  “You’re risking your life every moment you stay in Moundville.”
	Doc Haley looked at Mr. Walker then, and the two men exchanged a glance that was almost a smile.  “I thank you kindly, Reverend Cannon, for your concern.  But I’ve made up my mind.  And I think it’s time for all of you to get on home.”

	Tired as I was, when I got into bed that night, I couldn’t sleep.  Finally got up and went downstairs to get some water, and found Pa sitting on the front porch with the shotgun.  An oil lamp was still burning in the Walker’s cabin, but everything was silent.  I slipped into Mama’s chair.  The squeak of the rocker sounded loud in the night.
	Pa jumped.  “Oh, it’s you.”
	“Thought I’d sit up with you,” I said.
	“No.”
	“But…”
	Pa shook his head.  “Go get some sleep, Raymond.”
	“Pa, it’s me.”
	Pa rubbed his forehead, but said nothing.
	“Dit!”
	“Go to bed, Dit.”  
	“Would you really shoot Big Foot if he came round tonight?”
	“Big Foot’s not coming,” he snapped.
	“Then why’re you sitting out here?” I asked.	
	Pa’s face was pinched, as if he had a stomachache.  “’Cause if he did come round, he wouldn’t be alone.”  	
      “What you talking about?”
	Pa rocked a couple of times in his chair before answering.  “Dit, sometimes a group of people comes up with a stupid idea.  An idea so stupid, none of them would be fool enough to act on it alone, but together they…”
	Pa didn’t finish his sentence.  I thought of Chip and Bobby locking me in jail and knew what he meant.  The thought made me shiver and it wasn’t even that cold.
	“I can’t explain this now,” Pa said, rubbing his head again.  “Just go to bed.”
	“But, I…”
      “You talking back to your pa?”
	“No, but…”
	There was a sound in the bushes.
	Pa jumped to his feet, clutching the shotgun.  
      A man was standing in the shadow of the big oak tree in our front yard.  It looked like he was carrying a gun.  
	My hands suddenly felt very cold.
	“Who’s there?” Pa cried out.  He sounded scared.
	“It’s just me,” we heard Dr. Griffith say.  “Didn’t think you should be sitting up alone.”  Dr. Griffith stepped into a patch of moonlight and we could see his face.  Pa finally lowered his gun.
	“He’s not alone, I’m here with him,” I called out.
	“Dit?” Dr. Griffith sounded surprised, almost angry.  “What the heck is he doing out here?”
	“He’s going to bed,” Pa growled.
	“But…”
	“Harry Otis, get back inside the house,” Pa hissed, and I knew if I talked back again, there’d be a whipping for sure.
	So I went.  But I stopped when I got inside the door and looked out the front window.  Dr. Griffith was on the porch now.  He put a hand on my pa’s shoulder and said a few words I couldn’t hear.  Then he sat down in Mama’s rocker, his gun across his lap.  Both men sat quietly, looking out into the night.
	I went upstairs to bed.  But I didn’t sleep.  Instead, I kept watch out my window too. 







