 4 – THE MOUNDS

      When Mama told me to go play with Emma, I decided to take her to the top of my favorite mound.  See Moundville gets its name from the huge mounds of dirt that are spread out among the trees, twenty-six mounds in all.  Pa says they were built by Indians carrying baskets of dirt and dumping them out, one on top of the other.  Some of our mounds are over 60 feet high, so that’s a lot of dirt.
      Don’t know why the Indians built them mounds.  Ulman said something about a temple for heathen gods; Elman claimed they needed a lookout.  But if you ask me, I say it was a scheme come up with by some old woman to punish naughty children.  Ain’t nothing worse than hauling dirt.  
      Only took a couple of minutes for me to lead Emma through a field and a bit of wood to my mound.  This was the place I went when I wanted to be alone.  It wasn’t the tallest mound, but it had the best view when you climbed to the top.  The mound was steep and covered with pricker bushes too, which made it a hard climb.  I figured Emma wouldn’t like getting sweaty and dirty, and that climbing the mound would be the best way to get rid of her.
      Sure enough, Emma took one look up the steep grassy hill and shook her head.  “No thank you,” she said.
      “No thank you, what?” I said, playing dumb.
      “I’m not really that interested in climbing your mound after all.  Please take me home.”
      “I’m going up,” I said, “but you’re free to go back on your own.”
      Emma turned on her heel and marched back towards the woods.  When she reached the edge, she paused, and glanced at me again.  “I’m not sure I know the way.”
      “Then I guess you’d better come with me.”
      Emma took one last longing look at the woods, then trudged back over to where I was standing.  
      “Okay, then,” I said.  “Now as you may see, this mound is kind of steep.  So what you need to do is hold on to the base of these shrubs and use them to pull yourself up.”
      I demonstrated, scrambling a few feet up the mound.
      Emma grabbed a couple of leaves and pulled.  The branch she was clutching broke off and she tumbled to the ground.  
      “The base,” I said.  “You grab the leaves, they’ll fall right off.”
      Emma nodded and tried again.  This time she got a pricker bush.  She screamed and let go, falling down in the dirt again.
      I shook my head.
      Tears formed in her eyes, as she held her hand up as if it were broken.  “I don’t think I can do this.”
      “Shoot, you haven’t even given it a try.”  This girl was more a baby than I expected.  “But if you’re gonna cry about it, forget it.  You can wait here and I’ll pick you up on my way home.”
      “No,” said Emma.  She stuck her finger in her mouth and pulled out the thorn with her teeth.  “I’m not a crybaby.”
      I started on up the hill, and Emma followed as best she could.  By the time we got to the top, Emma only had a couple more scratches on her hands, but she was complaining like she was taking a bath with bees.  
      “If this is what you do for fun around here,” Emma said, as she tried to brush a smudge of dirt off her dress, “I’m never going to leave my front porch.”  
      Fine with me, I thought.  But all I said was, “Quit your whining,” and led Emma to the edge of the mound to see the view.  
      The tops of the trees were as bushy and soft as green-dyed cotton.  The Black Warrior River wound lazily through the forest.  The fields of corn spread out in shades of brown and beige.  Between the fields, a train chugged along, tooting its horn and letting off a stream of smoke.  The sun shone down through hazy clouds and caused everything to shimmer.
      “Wow,” Emma breathed. 
      I knew what she meant.  I’d seen this view a thousand times, but it still made me feel big and small at the same time.  
      Emma shook her head.  Her mama had plaited her hair into little braids and tied the ends with bits of ribbon.  “I take it back,” Emma said, “this view is worth the scolding I’m going to get when my mama sees my dress.”  
      I frowned.  She wasn’t supposed to like it that much.  This was my place and I didn’t need no company.  “Want to see something else?”  I asked.
      “Sure.”  
      I took my flip-it out of my back pocket.  This was a slingshot I had made by whittling down an old stick ‘til it had two strong prongs and a comfortable handle.  This particular one I had made out of a piece of driftwood from the Black Warrior.  I cut a strip of rubber from an old automobile tire and a little piece of leather from the tongue of an old shoe and tied them together.  With my flip-it, I could hit just about anything.
      “Find me a little stone,” I said to Emma.
      She picked one up and handed it to me.  “See that bird?” I said, pointing to a yellowhammer picking ants off a nearby tree.  The yellowhammer is actually a kind of woodpecker, with bright yellow feathers under its wings that are only visible when it flies.  They are as common as ants in Moundville.
      “Yes,” Emma answered.  
      I put the rock in my flip-it and let it fly.  The bird was stretching out its neck for another ant.  When the rock hit it, the yellowhammer fell like a stone to the ground.  
      “You killed it!”  Emma gasped.  
      “Yeah,” I said grinning.  Everyone was always real impressed with my flip-it skills.
      Emma looked at me like I was a pig with slop all over its face.  Then she turned and ran towards the fallen bird.  I caught a glimpse of its yellow feathers as she picked it up.
       “Want to see me get another?”  I called out. 
      Emma didn’t answer.  She had a stick in one hand and was trying to dig a hole in the ground.
      “What you doing?” I asked.
      “You killed it,” she repeated.  
      “You bury it in the ground, it’s just gonna rot.”  
      “What do you want to do with it?”  The frown on her face let me know she was definitely not a pig lover.
      “I’m gonna feed it to the eagle.”
      Emma put her hands on her hips.  “I don’t see an eagle.”
      So I wrapped up the bird in a large leaf, tucked it in my pocket, and led Emma down the mound to Big Foot’s house.
      Big Foot was the town sheriff, a large man, tall as one of our mounds, and mean as a hooked snapper.  He lived in a small, wooden house given to him by his mama, Mrs. Pooley, who owned the general store.  The house had been well-built once, but now it needed a new paint job and the front porch was beginning to sag.  In one corner of the yard was a large iron cage, where an old eagle slept with her head tucked under her wing.  I rapped on the bars to wake the bird up, then threw the dead yellowhammer into the cage.  The leaf wrapper fell away.  The eagle lifted her head and devoured the dead bird in a few messy bites.
      Emma put her hand to her mouth like she was gonna throw up.  
      “You feeling all right?” I asked.
      “You should’ve let me bury it.”
      “Why?”
      “That bird just tore the other one apart!”
      I shrugged.  “She’s gotta to eat.”
      “Well, it’s disgusting.”
       “Bet you don’t look too pretty chewing your food up either.”
      Emma ignored me.  “You shouldn’t keep an eagle in a cage anyway.  They’re supposed to fly free.  Poor bird.”  
      “Poor bird?” I asked.  “I just gave her a delicious supper.”
      “I wouldn’t want a free supper if it meant I had to be locked up in a cage.”  She stroked the side of the cage with one finger, then gave me that look again.  
      I’d had just about enough.  “Don’t you look at me like I’m some old sow!”
      Emma tipped her head like a confused dog.  “An old what?”
      “A pig!  After I was nice enough to show you around.” 
      “You weren’t that nice,” she snapped back.  “You didn’t warn me about the thorn bushes.”  She held up her scratched hands.
      She had a point there.  
      “Who’s there?” a voice suddenly called out.  We both took a step back.  Big Foot came out onto his porch carrying a shotgun.  Though it wasn’t a Sunday, he wore a white shirt with a starched collar.  Big Foot always had a clean shirt on, I’ll give him that.  Either Mrs. Pooley still did her son’s laundry or she’d taught him to wash and iron them himself.
      “It’s me, Dit,” I said.  “I was just feeding your eagle.”
      Big Foot glanced at me, then looked Emma over.  “You the new Negra girl?” he asked finally.
      “Yes,” said Emma.
      “You say, ‘Yes, sir,’ to a white man around here.”
      Emma said nothing.
      “Dit, I warned you about uppity Negras.  That Elbert’s bad enough.  Don’t you go being friends with this one too.”
      Elbert was a colored boy I went fishing with in the summer.  Since Chip went to visit his grandma just about every year, I guess you could say Chip was my school friend and Elbert was my summer friend.  But Elbert was 15, same age as my older brother, Elman, who had recently started acting strange.  Pa had taught him how to drive, and all at once, Elman was more interested in chores and crops and being responsible, than in fooling around with the rest of us.  I was worried the same thing was gonna happen to Elbert, which was why I’d been counting on the postmaster’s son to be my backup.  
      “Awe, Big Foot,” I said with a wave of my hand.  “My mama’s making me show her around.  We ain’t friends.”
      Big Foot nodded and went back inside.  Me and Emma walked home.  She was awful quiet.  When we reached her house, she didn’t even bother to say good-bye.  






