1
The Talisman
Pretty soon, it was the last weekend in September, the last weekend before our presentation. There was an election going on that Saturday, and both Mother and Daddy were in a bad mood. I think the grown-ups were trying to decide if they should keep the high schools closed or open them again. But of course they didn’t say it that way. No, it was more like, Do you think it’s a good idea for whites and Negroes to go to school together?
    That was kind of tricky, if you ask me. There aren’t too many people in Little Rock who’d say yes to that kind of question. Mother and Daddy voted first thing in the morning, even before we cleaned the house. They didn’t say how they voted, and I didn’t ask.
    But I thought about it. I tried to imagine what it would be like going to school with Betty Jean, since she was the only colored person I’d ever really talked to (if you call drinking a glass of tea a conversation). I tried to picture Betty Jean as a twelve-year-old girl, but I kept imagining a smaller version of her in a big flowered apron. It made me giggle as I vacuumed my room.
    Soon as I was done cleaning, I ran out of the house to meet Liz at the zoo. We were going to go over our presentation one more time. I’d done my part at least twice for every animal in the zoo. I’d said my lines in front of the mirror at home, trying to maintain eye contact with myself. I’d even said my part for Judy, late at night, when Mother and Daddy were asleep. I’d done everything I could to prepare. I knew my lines perfectly. And I was still terrified.
    Liz was late. I watched the lions, but they were just lying there, sleeping. I got more nervous every second I stood there alone, so I thought about all the ways Liz had taught me to relax.
    One: take a deep breath.
    Two: imagine all the people at school in their underwear.[ CE8] This didn't work too well.  Just thinking about JT in his underwear made my heart beat way too fast.
    Three: my good old friends the prime numbers. I’d actually told Liz about them, and she hadn’t laughed. I’d reached 83 by the time Liz finally appeared. She was clutching a paper bag.
    “Sorry I’m late,” she said. “I’ve got a surprise for you.”
    “What?”
    She reached in the bag and pulled out two small green turtles. Their claws scrabbled gently on her hand. “I got them at the variety store,” she said. “Let’s have a race.”
    “Liz,” I said, “we have to practice.”
    Liz waved a hand in the air. “Marlee, there’s one more rule of giving a presentation I haven’t taught you yet.
    “What?” I should have brought a pencil to write this down.
    “You have to know when you’re done.”
    "But I'm not done," I said.
    “You know your part cold,” said Liz. “Heck, I bet you even know mine too.”
    I shook my head. “Let’s go over it a few more times.”
    “Marlee, at some point you just have to believe that you can do it.”
    “Well, I don’t.”
    Liz sighed.
    She was getting frustrated. This wasn’t going to work. Any minute now, she’d give up and say she’d do all the talking after all, and I’d be incredibly relieved and incredibly disappointed. That’s what Sally would have done.
    But Liz wasn’t Sally. Instead of giving up, she started looking around like she’d lost something on the ground.
    “What are you doing?” I asked.
    “Looking for a talisman.”
    “A what?”
    “A talisman. A good luck charm.”
    Like she was going to find a gold amulet or a magic ring lying around on the ground amidst popcorn and peanut shells.
    But after a few moments she said, “Aha!” and picked up a single black crow’s feather. “You’ve seen Dumbo, right?” asked Liz.
    I nodded. I’d seen the movie a bunch of times when I was little. I could relate to the little elephant with the big ears. He didn’t talk either.
    “Well, this is a magic feather. Put it in your pocket, and if you get nervous during the presentation, just touch it, and you’ll be fine.”
    “A magic feather?”
    “Yeah,” said Liz.
    “That’s kind of silly.”
    “Just try it.”
    "Fine."  I[s9] held out my hand.
    Liz placed the feather carefully on my palm.
    It weighed nothing, just a wisp of air. The feather tickled my hand, but as for making me less nervous, nope, it didn’t do a thing.
    “Better?” Liz asked.
    I nodded.  I didn't have the heart to tell her no.
    “Good.” Liz pulled out a small bottle from her pocket. “Because I brought nail polish so we can paint our names on the back of the turtles. That way, you’ll know for sure that it was mine when it wins.”
    So instead of working, we painted our names on the backs of the tiny turtles and let them run up and down our arms as we waited for the polish to dry. Then we raced the turtles across one of the large stones that made up the lion’s den. My turtle won.
    “Least we know for sure it was mine,” I said, and Liz laughed.
    It was getting late, so we walked down to the ducks and let the turtles go. They slid silently into the murky green water and paddled away. 
    “That was really fun,” I said. At least it had taken my mind off the presentation for a little while.
    “You’ll be fine,” said Liz. “I’ll bring the magic square book with me to school on Monday.”
    “I’m still not sure I can do it,” I admitted.
    “I believe in you,” said Liz.
    “Thanks,” I whispered.
    She put her arm in mine, and we turned to go home.
