0
The Christmas Parade
December 6 came and went. Three moderate candidates were elected (Lamb, Tucker and Matson) and three segregationists, so the school board was deadlocked again. Still, Miss Winthrop managed to put a positive spin on it when I saw her as I climbed onto the Christmas float. “Three is better than none. We’ll get there yet, Marlee!”
    I nodded.
    “Besides, I’ve been getting a lot more threatening phone calls,” said Miss Winthrop. “I think that’s a good sign we’re making a difference.” 
    We hadn't gotten any more calls, thank goodness.  Daddy hadn't said a word about it to me, but I'd seen him talking to Mr. Haroldson.  I remembered Daddy saying our neighbor was a member of the segregationist Capital Citizens Council.  He was also on our party line and probably didn't appreciate being woken up in the middle of the night.  Maybe he'd put a stop to our calls.
    In any case, I didn't want to think about that.  Today was the Christmas parade and our float was impressive. There was a little hill built on a low platform, and the whole thing was being pulled by a tractor. The hill was covered with fake grass and flowers, and at the top was a throne. Reverend Mitchell sat in the chair and wore a fake beard and a long white robe, but every time he laughed, he kind of went “ho ho ho,” and he ended up reminding me more of Santa Claus than Jesus.
    I settled into a spot between a fake bush and a stuffed rabbit. Not sure why there was a rabbit—maybe it was left over from Easter? Practically everyone from our Sunday school class was there, so it was crowded. There was one space left right next to me.
    “Wonderful! Wonderful!” exclaimed Miss Winthrop, clapping her hands. “You really do look like the poor masses.”
    At the last minute, Little Jimmy ran up and sat down next to me. His hair was sticking up in all directions, as if he hadn’t combed it. “I overslept,” he said. “Thanks for saving me a seat.”
    I hadn’t, but it seemed rude to say that, so I just nodded.
    There was a lurch, and we started off.
    The crowd got larger and larger as we drove through town. Mother and Daddy were right near the start of the parade, smiling. Mrs. McDaniels and Sally stood next to them. Sally hadn’t been selected to ride on her church’s float. She’d complained about it for three days straight at school. Still, I waved to her, and she waved back.
    A little further down the route, I saw Curtis and Betty Jean and Pastor George, waving so hard I was afraid their hands would fall off. Next to them was Tommy, and a man and a woman who I guessed must be Liz’s parents. I waved at them too.
    Little Jimmy was watching me wave at them.
    Then the truck turned the corner and they were gone.
    Little Jimmy leaned over and whispered, “JT is saying you’re still friends with Liz.”
    I stared at him.
    “Are you?” asked Little Jimmy.
    I shook my head no.
    “Oh,” said Little Jimmy, “I was hoping it was true. I liked Liz.” He pulled his notebook out and found a stub of pencil and started to write.
    I wanted to tell him it was true, but when I counted 2, 3, 5, 7, what came out instead was, “What do you write in there?”
    “Words.”
    “About what?”
    “Things that are too hard to say aloud,” said Little Jimmy.
    Maybe I was the one who needed a notebook, not Liz. “What are you writing now?”
    Little Jimmy gave me a funny look. I was sure he wasn’t going to answer me, when he said, “How I think you’re lying. And that I wish you’d tell her hi for me.”
    My mouth made a little round O. “If I run into her, I will,” I stammered finally.
    “Thanks,” said Little Jimmy. And he went back to his writing.
    I wasn’t sure what to think. Now I’d added Little Jimmy to my talking list. He’d accused me of lying, but somehow, I still got the feeling that he wanted to be my friend. After all, he’d warned me about JT.
    I thought doing JT's homework meant he would keep his mouth shut. I couldn’t think of any other way to get him to be quiet, except to be utterly silent on the topic myself. That way, it’d only seem like mean-spirited gossip. At least, that was what I hoped.
    The rest of the parade was ruined by worrying about JT, and when it finally ended and I climbed off, guess who was waiting for me? Yep, that’s right. JT himself.
    “Congrats, Marlee,” JT said. “The mayor just announced your float won first place.”
    I glared at him.
    “What?” he said. “What did I do?”
    I turned my back to him. Red was across the street, watching a colored man who was cleaning up after the parade, sweeping trash into a pile. When the man was done, he turned to get his dustpan and while he wasn’t looking, Red walked through the pile, kicking his feet until bits of paper and bottle caps were strewn across the street again. He was humming “White Christmas.” 
    “You missed a spot,” said Red.
    The man glared at Red once, then slowly started sweeping up the mess.
    When he was done, Red stepped into the pile again. “Like jumping in leaves,” he said. “Try it, JT. It’s fun!”
    JT walked into the street and half-heartedly kicked a bottle.
    Their father, Mr. Dalton, appeared then. He was a large, beefy man who looked like his younger son, if you blew JT up with a bicycle pump to twice his size. “Come on, boys,” he said. “Let’s go.” His voice was overpowering, like the smell of the schnapps my father sometimes drank after a big meal.
    Mrs. Dalton hovered behind him, gray and silent. Red started singing as they walked off, but he changed the words: “I’m dreaming of a white Central.”
    Mr. Dalton laughed.
    The colored man gripped his broom tighter and started sweeping yet again, but I could see the rage in his eyes.
