9
Robes in the Closet
Every Sunday afternoon in April I spent at Mrs. Terry’s house. The first week when I arrived, there was a young woman in the dining room balancing a toddler on her lap as she tried to type a letter. The child was fussing.
    “I’ll take her,” I said.
    “Thank you.” The woman stood up and handed her daughter to me. “I’m Mrs. Knowlton. Her name’s Jackie.”
    “Hi, Jackie,” I said. “I’m Marlee.”
    The child screamed.
    “I’ll take her back,” sighed Mrs. Knowlton.
    “No, let me try something.” I scooped up Jackie under her arms and spun her around in a circle, just like my father used to do with me.
    Jackie was so surprised she stopped crying. I stopped spinning.
    “More! More!” she cried.
    I started spinning again. Jackie laughed.
    “Hey, Miss Winthrop,” called Mrs. Knowlton.
    Miss Winthrop poked her head in the room.
    “Got any more volunteers like her?” she said, pointing at me. “’Cause if you do, we’ll have these schools opened by next week.”
    Jackie and I kept spinning, spinning, until we fell down, laughing in a heap. The room spun, but the compliment remained. Since I was the youngest, I’d always wanted a baby sister or brother. I cradled Jackie, and she put her head on my shoulder as I walked around the parlor. When she was finally asleep, I put her down on the couch and went back to the dining room.
    “You got her to take a nap?” her mother asked.
    I nodded. “I sang to her.”
    “What?”
    “The times tables,” I said.
    Mrs. Knowlton laughed.
    I watched Jackie every week after that, and once she was asleep I’d sit down with the others at the huge, dark oak table in the dinning room to help with paperwork. Mrs. Brewer was usually there, talking on the phone, and Mrs. Terry, of course, and Miss Winthrop and Jackie’s mother, and Mrs. Dalton, silently putting flyers into an envelope.
    I looked at the flyer. It had a picture of a child with a suitcase in one hand and said Will this be your child next fall? Over 1,000 children had to leave Little Rock to go to school this year. There is no substitute for Public Schools.
    “My brother was telling me about the Act 10 thing,” I said as I started folding. “Is the WEC going to do anything about it?”
    “I believe,” said Mrs. Brewer, “that Mr. Shelton—he’s a colored teacher at Horace Mann—is working on filing a suit with the NAACP.”
    “Yes,” said Miss Winthrop. “And Vice Principal Powell from Central is going to join him.”
    “Until the suit is filed and the courts rule on it,” said Mrs. Brewer, “public employees will have to sign or not sign as they see fit.”
    Mrs. Terry walked into the room then and placed a large pile of mail addressed to the WEC in front of me. “Marlee, would you mind opening these?”
    “Sure,” I said.
    “Thank you. Just put them into a pile and let me know if there’s anything you think needs my immediate attention.”
    I nodded and pulled my silver letter opener out of my purse. Miss Winthrop hummed softly as we all worked. The first few letters I opened were just routine correspondence, bills, membership applications, stuff like that. But the next three . . . 
    “Some of these aren’t very nice,” I said.
    “What do you mean?” Mrs. Terry asked.
    “If you go out today, you will be hit by a car and killed,” I read.
    Mrs. Terry plucked that letter from my hand.
    “There’s also Say good-bye to your loved ones and I thought you were a good Christian woman. I’m ashamed of you.”
    Mrs. Terry took both of those too. “I’m sorry, Marlee. The threats go in a separate file. I’m afraid this is not an appropriate task for you. Perhaps you could go back to stuffing envelopes?”
    Miss Winthrop took over the mail-opening duties, and we all went back to work. But no one hummed anymore. I wanted them to think I was mature and grown-up, but I couldn’t help asking, “All those letters. Aren’t you scared?”
    “Of course we’re scared,” said Mrs. Terry. “But you can’t let that stop you.”
    “It’s like the phone calls,” said Mrs. Brewer. “The first one is awful, but by the hundredth, well, you hope those people are all just talk.”
    “What is it your husband does again when he gets the calls?” asked Miss Winthrop.
    “Oh, sometimes he reads them poetry. Or he starts talking to them in French. Or singing an aria from an opera. Mr. Brewer has quite a good voice.”
    We kept working in silence for a while. “Another one for your file,” said Miss Winthrop.
    I glanced at the letter before anyone could stop me. You and all the others who think like you should be tied to a car and dragged down Ninth Street, as did happen once before.
    “What’s it talking about?” I asked.
    Mrs. Terry sighed. “The lynching. The last one in Little Rock was in 1927.”
    “What happened?” I asked.
    “No,” Mrs. Knowlton said. “She’s too young to know.”
    “She’s helping us,” said Miss Winthrop. “I say that makes her old enough.”
    Mrs. Terry sighed. “A colored man, John Carter was his name, was taken by a mob of people. No one did anything. Not the police or anyone watching. Nobody even tried to save him. They hung him and shot him and dragged his body down the street and then burned him. It happened at the edge of the Negro district, on Ninth and Broadway. This house is only eight blocks away. From my front porch, I could see the glow of the fire and hear people screaming.”
    We were all silent then. I heard the ripping of the paper, as Miss Winthrop opened the envelopes. The squeeze of the sponge as Jackie’s mother wet a stamp. Someone cleared her throat, and I looked over to see that it was Mrs. Dalton. She hadn’t said a word the whole time.
    “I’m here, helping,” she whispered, “because once I found white robes in my husband’s closet. I was too ashamed to ask him what they were. I guess I knew. And I was too scared to throw them out. But when the schools were closed, I realized I had to do something.”
    “If your husband is part of the Klan,” Miss Winthrop said, “aren’t you worried if he finds out you’re helping us?”
    “Yes, I was.” Mrs. Dalton shook her head. “But according to him, this is just a ladies group. Harmless. We won’t accomplish anything.”
    The baby woke up then, and I was glad to get up and give her a bottle. I even started whispering the times tables again. I might have claimed it was to soothe her, but really, it was so I didn’t have to think about lynchings and death threats and robes in the closet.
