2
Mother’s Speech
The Forest Park auditorium was filled to overflowing when we got there—and it held over four hundred people. Mother put her name on the list of speakers, while Daddy and I went to find seats. There was a police car out front and an officer in the lobby.
    There were a lot of people who wanted to speak. I tried to listen, but I had a hard time, because next to me Mother was getting more and more nervous. Most people start to fidget when they’re anxious, but Mother gets stiller and stiller, until pretty soon, it’s like sitting next to a statue. I had to do something. 
    “Mother?” I said.
    “What?”
    “Do you remember Dumbo?” I knew she did. When I was little, she’d taken me to the film at least three times herself.
    “Yes.”
    I pulled the black feather out of my purse. “This is a magic feather,” I said. “When you get up there and feel nervous, rub your fingers across the feather, and you’ll know what to say.”
    Mother gave me a look.
    “I know. It sounds silly, but—”
    There was clapping and then a man on the stage said, “Former PTA president Maurine Nisbett will speak next.”
    Mother held out her hand. “Give me the feather.”
    Mother made her way up to the podium and adjusted the microphone. Daddy leaned forward. He seemed as nervous as Mother. I held my breath. But when Mother began to speak, her voice was calm.
    “When the schools were closed last September, I wanted to believe our elected officials were doing what was best for our community. Maybe, like me, you sent a child away to go to school, thinking it would be temporary, a few weeks at most. I didn’t want to get involved.
    “Months later, maybe, like me, you’ve become more and more frustrated, as this crisis has dragged on and on. Maybe you’ve begun to question our officials’ disregard for court rulings, their prying into our personal activities.
    “Now, with the firings of seven principals, three secretaries and thirty-four teachers[ CE33], including my own husband, I realize it is no longer enough for me to think these things. I need to say them.”
    Mother looked at me, and I suddenly remembered the WEC flyer we had folded together: Saying what you think is as important as thinking it! Speak out for public schools! 
    “Maybe, like me, you’re afraid. I know I was when my husband first started to take a stand on these issues. I was worried, not that he was wrong, but about what others might think. I was afraid the neighbors might call me names. Me, a grown woman, concerned about appearances.
    “Or maybe you’re a businessman, and saying to yourself, ‘But if I speak out on this issue, there will be real consequences for me. Not just words, people will boycott my store. I might lose business.’ I’m not going to pretend that isn’t a risk, because it is. But it’s time. Time to take a stand. The risks—to our students, to our schools, to our town’s reputation—are too great if we stand aside and say nothing.
“It was my younger daughter, who is rather quiet herself, who convinced me of the need to speak out. She left this in my purse.” Mother pulled out a piece of pink stationery and held it up. “This is from 1 Peter 3:14.     But even if you do suffer for righteousness' sake, you will be blessed.  Have no fear of them, nor be troubled.[ CE36]
    “For months now, I’ve carried around this quotation. But no matter which way I look at it, I can come to only one conclusion. If my own daughter realizes that we must speak out, how can I do any less?
    “Now, I don’t know what Principal Wood’s views are on integration. I don’t much care. When my daughter wouldn’t talk in school, Mrs. Wood was the one who reassured me that Marlee would be okay. She saw that Marlee was brave and perceptive and smart, and she made me see it too. Mrs. Wood is the best educator I’ve ever known, and the idea that she should be fired for anything she believes or does on her own time, is absolutely ridiculous.”
    Mother stopped talking then. One man started clapping and then another and another, until the whole room was applauding. I glanced over at my father, and he was grinning too. And Mother, behind the podium, was holding up a tiny black feather.
