6
Summer
A lot of things happened that summer.
    In June, new school board members were appointed, and they voted to rehire the purged teachers. Daddy received his teaching contract for the next year on June 18. He signed it and returned it to the post office the very same day.
    David changed his major yet again. He was studying politics this time and went to live with a friend in Washington, DC, for the summer.
    Mother gave Betty Jean a raise.
    And Judy came home. I expected it to be awkward, like our visit at Christmas, or tense, like over spring break when I had to watch every word. But it wasn’t. It was comfortable. Like reuniting with an old friend. After dinner, I went into her room to watch her unpack. 
    “And tomorrow,” said Judy, “maybe we can go to the zoo and then the pool.”
    “Actually . . . ,” I said.
    “What?”
    “I already have plans.”
    “Oh.”
    I couldn’t read her face. Was she disappointed or surprised or something else? “I’m going to the movies with Nora. We’re going to see South Pacific downtown and out for ice cream afterward.”
    “Oh. Nora, huh?”
    “You can come too if you want.”
    “Nah, I really wanted to catch up with Margaret.” To my surprise, Judy was smiling. “I was just trying to be nice to you. But it sounds like you don’t need me to arrange your social life anymore.”
    “No,” I said. “I guess I don’t.”
    “You don’t sound too happy about that,” said Judy. “It’s a good thing, Marlee.”
    “I know, it’s just . . .” And then I told her about Liz, and our final phone call.
    “Oh,” Judy said when I was done. “Well, last time she disappeared you sent her a note, didn’t you?”
    “Yes,” I said.
    “Well,” said Judy. “Maybe you should try it again.”
So I wrote Liz a note. It was really more of a letter this time. I told her about how Little Jimmy and I had had our Coke by the pool, how we’d eaten a burger at Krystal and gone skating at Troy’s on a rainy afternoon. I told her that Nora, it turned out, liked cards, and was almost as good at hearts as I was. I told her how JT and Sally were going steady, and how it had seemed to make them nicer to everyone, at least most of the time.
    Most of all, though, I told Liz about how I went to the zoo, every Tuesday afternoon, by myself, and thought about her and the past year. I told her how Red was gone, and that I still had the book of magic squares. Every time I added up a row, column or diagonal, I thought of her. I promised to be at the zoo every Tuesday afternoon that summer, just in case she ever wanted to join me by the lions.
    I was just getting ready to seal the letter and run it over to Pastor George to give to Liz at youth group, just like I’d done before, when I thought of something else. I looked through my purse and found the tattered black feather. I tucked it inside and licked the envelope shut.
    I waited week after week by the lions, but she never showed up.
The high schools were scheduled to open early that year, on August 12, 1959, before the pools even closed. The elementary schools and junior highs wouldn’t open until the day after Labor Day, like always.
    When August 12 finally came, Daddy and I got up with Mother and Judy, in a reverse of the day last fall when Daddy and I had gone to school and they hadn’t. We all got into the car and drove Mother to Hall High School and dropped off Judy at Central.
    On the way home, one of the streets was blocked off. Daddy parked the car and we got out to see what was going on.
    There were more than two hundred people in the street, some in cars and some on foot. In the front, walked a man holding a Confederate flag. Others held signs reading ARKANSAS IS FOR FAUBUS and RACE MIXING IS COMMUNISM. 
    “What’s going on?” I asked.
    “They’re protesting,” said Daddy in a monotone.
    “We’re marching to Central,” a man called out. “Stopped them last year. We will again.”
    “No,” Daddy muttered. “Not again.”
    A car was playing “Dixie” way too loud.
    “This is how it started in 1957,” whispered Daddy. “Protests that turned into mobs. And the police did nothing.” Daddy and I turned and saw police and firemen up ahead. They’d set up a small barrier. Daddy shook his head. “They’re going to let the protesters pass, just like they did two years ago.”
    But I thought I saw something different in their faces, a determination to make Little Rock a different place than it was before.
    One of the officers held up a megaphone. “Stop. You are not allowed to get any closer to the high school.”
    The protesters just kept marching on.
    I’m not sure who was more surprised, Daddy or the protesters, when the firemen turned the hoses on. In an instant, the segregationists were soaked.
    Most of the protesters left immediately, wet and soggy as they made their way home. But a few became enraged and started throwing rocks, bottles, the very signs in their hands.
    But before we could run back to the safety of our car, the police moved in and began arresting people. Daddy and I stood and watched, frozen. “It’s not going to happen again.” And when he grabbed my hand, I thought he was going to cry.
    In a few minutes, over twenty people were arrested, and the street was empty again. They’d been stopped just a block from Central High School.
    Daddy looked at me.
    “Have no fear of them,” I quoted Peter at him. “Nor be troubled.”
    He gave me a hug. “That’s my brave girl.”
    At dinner, when we asked Judy how school had gone that day, she said, “Fine. There weren’t even any protests this time.”
    Daddy and I glanced at each other, but we didn’t say a word.
    In the end, there were only three colored students at Hall—Effie Jones, Elsie Robinson and Estella Thompson—and only two at Central—Carlotta Walls and Jefferson Thomas. There were no colored students at the junior highs or elementary schools. “Only five students,” said Mother, shaking her head.
    We still had a long, long way to go. 
