6
Being Quiet
When I walked into Mr. Harding’s room on Tuesday, I still didn’t know how I was going to teach Liz to be quiet. But once lunch started and Mr. Harding and I spent fifteen minutes on x and y and solving for the unknown, I felt like a new person. A better person. One who could do things I didn’t normally do. If numbers could do all that for me, maybe they could help Liz too.
Liz was waiting when I got to the rock crusher that afternoon.
    “I have an idea,” I said, as I walked in to the clearing.
    “What?”
    “You asked me how I managed to be so quiet. It’s numbers. I count prime numbers in my head and—”
    “That’s when you want to talk,” said Liz.
    “It’s when I’m trying to do something I’m not good at,” I said. “And what you’re not good at is being quiet when you're angry.”[ CE21]
    Liz thought for a moment, then shook her head. “I don’t even know the prime numbers. And if you tell me to count to ten before I speak like my mother always does, I will scream.”
    Okay. So counting was out. “How about times tables?” I asked.
    “What about them?”
    “Well, which ones do you like?”
    “I don’t like any times tables!” exclaimed Liz.
    Every once in a while, I just couldn’t relate to her at all. Who didn’t like the times tables? Such beauty! Such patterns! Such organization! Okay, so I knew it wasn’t normal, but it was how I saw them. “We’ll do the nines then,” I said, rummaging in my purse for a pen. “Hold up your hands in front of you with your thumbs together.”
    With the pen, I labeled each of her fingers with a number from one to ten, left to right, starting with her left pinkie (one) and ending with her right pinkie (ten).
    “Now put down your pinkie on your left hand,” I said. “The one with the number one on it.”
    “How is this going to help me be quiet?” asked Liz.
    “Just do it.”
    Liz sighed and put down her pinkie.
    “How many fingers do you have left?”
    “Nine.”
    “Exactly. One times nine is nine.”
    “I knew that,” said Liz.
    “Now put down your ring finger on your left hand. The one with the two.”
    Liz did so.
    “How many fingers do you have to the left of the one that is down?”
    “One.”
    “And to the right?”
    “Eight.”
    “Two times nine is eighteen.”
    Liz gave me a look. “Does it work for all of them?”
    “Try it.”
    She put down her middle finger, labeled three. Two fingers to the left; seven to the right. Three times nine is twenty-seven.
    “Okay, so that is pretty cool,” said Liz.
    “So every time you feel words starting to creep out when you don’t want them to, look down at your hands and recite the nines times tables. By the time you’re done, you won’t even remember whatever it was you wanted to say.”
    Liz wasn’t listening. She had her thumb on her right hand tucked in and was counting. “Six times nine is fifty-four. I could never remember that one!”
    “That’s the point.” I laughed. “You don’t have to remember a thing.” I wiggled my fingers at her. “All you have to do is count.”
Liz liked the trick I had taught her, but I wasn’t sure it was enough. When I got home, I found Mother in the kitchen, going through the mail. “Did you put this in my notebook?” asked Mother, holding up the pink piece of stationery.
    “Yes,” I said. 
    “Oh,” said Mother.
    I waited for her to ask why, so I could explain what Miss Winthrop had said about Peter and tell her why I had joined the WEC. But she didn’t. She just passed me my mail.
    I was disappointed. I’d imagined us sitting down and having a long chat, talking and laughing like we’d done when I was little. Still, if she wasn’t going to say anything, I wouldn’t either.
    I had two pieces of mail. The first was another postcard from Judy:
Dear Little Sis,
    I hate it here. I didn’t make pep squad, and I’m failing math. (Not really. But I have a C!) Please send two PayDays and a deck of cards. I’m playing a lot of solitaire. Lots of love.
Judy
    The second was another flyer from the WEC. It read “People who care about their teachers, their children’s education, their city’s future, want open public schools.”
    I cared. Helping Liz and leaving notes for Mother and sending candy bars to Judy was nice, but it wasn’t enough. Not when there might be more that I could do.
