1
Consequences
I had to tell the whole story three times. Once to Betty Jean. She made me call Mother and Daddy when I was done, and after they rushed home, I had to tell them everything again. Then Daddy called the police.
    Sergeant Pike was an older man with silver hair and beard, and he shook my father’s hand like they knew each other. He had kind eyes like a grandfather’s and listened to my whole story without an expression on his face.
    “Well, young lady,” he said when I was done, “you have gotten yourself into a great deal of trouble.” He sighed. “I’ll pay the Daltons a visit. But if they don’t want to let me search their house, there’s not a lot I can do.”
    He turned to Betty Jean. “Has the colored girl’s family been informed?”
    Betty Jean nodded. She’d made a bunch of calls while we were waiting for Sergeant Pike to arrive.
    “Good. I’ll ask my officers to increase patrols in that neighborhood. Can you give me the address?”
    Betty Jean nodded again. “My husband is going to go over and sit up with them tonight.”
    It was the policeman’s turn to nod. “That’s probably a good idea.”
    “But Red doesn’t know where Liz lives,” I said. “Or what she looks like. He’s just blowing off a lot of hot air. Isn’t he?”
    No one in the room answered. And I realized it wouldn’t be that hard if he really wanted to find out. Even though I was at home, with my parents and a police officer, I suddenly felt scared. I couldn’t go to the rock crusher anymore. I couldn’t meet Liz anywhere.
    The policeman finally left, but dinner was worse than the telling had been. I could barely choke down a piece of pot roast. I had to know what they were going to do to me. Anything would be better than not knowing my punishment.
    “I’ve called Granny,” Daddy said finally. “We’ll drive you to Pine Bluff tonight.”
    “What?” I asked.
    “You’re going to stay with Judy and your grandmother.”
    “No!”
    “Marlee, I warned you to stay away from Liz. You should have listened. For her sake, if not your own.”
    “It’s not my fault about the dynamite!”
    “No,” said Daddy. “It’s your fault Red is targeting Liz. If you’d left her alone like I asked, he would have forgotten all about her by now.”
    The worse part was, maybe he was right.
    “Have you not been paying attention to anything going on in Little Rock?” Daddy continued. “The FBI came to David’s graduation because there were so many threats made against Ernest Green. The FBI!”
    “I know it’s serious,” I said. “But—”
    There was a knock at the door.
    “I’ll get it,” said Mother.
    Daddy and I stood frozen. Why hadn’t Mother said anything? Did she want me to go? A minute later, Mother returned with Miss Winthrop in tow. Her face was flushed and red, as if she had been running. “I’ve been calling all afternoon!” she exclaimed. “The line was always busy.”
    “Miss Winthrop,” Daddy started, “we’ve had a stressful day and I think—”
    “Oh, so you’ve heard the news?” Miss Winthrop asked.
    “What news?” asked Daddy.
    “Mrs. Brewer asked me to tell you personally because . . .” She paused. A long dramatic pause. “You’ve been fired.”
    “What?”
    “The school board has fired a whole bunch of teachers! Forty-four people in all. Including you.”
    No one said a word.
    “Actually, it was half the school board, and you weren’t really fired, but your contract wasn't renewed for next year.”
     “Sit down,” said Mother, “and start from the beginning.”
    Miss Winthrop drank half a pitcher of tea and ate a sandwich as she filled us in. The school board had been having a normal meeting. They were supposed to rehire all the teachers for the upcoming year. But when it became clear that the board president was going to go through the list one by one and try to fire anyone he thought was supportive of integration, Lamb, Tucker and Matson walked out of the meeting.
    “Why’d they do that?” I asked.
    “They’d been told by their lawyer that without them there, there would be no quorum and all the teachers would be automatically rehired. But then, after lunch, those still there, McKinley, Rowland and Laster, declared themselves a quorum and started firing thirty-four teachers, seven principals and three secretaries. Including Mr. Shelton from Horace Mann and Vice Principal Powell from Central and Principal Wood from Forest Park Elementary and—”
    “And me,” said Daddy quietly.
    “And you,” Miss Winthrop agreed.
    “Is that legal?” asked Mother.
    “I don’t think so,” said Miss Winthrop. “But they did it, and I don’t know who is going to stop them. Before I left, I stood up and asked, ‘Why are they being let go?’ I knew the answer, of course. Every single person on it is a supporter of integration. But I wanted to make them say it. McKinley just cut me off and said there was no time for discussion.”
    Miss Winthrop wiped her mouth. “Thanks for the meal. I hadn’t eaten all day. The Forest Park PTA is meeting tonight at seven to discuss the firings. I hope you’ll all be there. Now if you’ll excuse me . . .”
    Mother walked her to the door.
    I sat by Daddy at the table. He looked completely stricken. I’d never seen him so defeated.
    “I’m sorry, Daddy.”
    He shook his head. “What are we going to do?”
    “We,” said Mother firmly, walking back into the kitchen, “are going to that meeting. I was president of the Forest Park PTA, and I have a few things I want to say.”
    I didn’t usually see Mother like this, confident and in charge. It was nice. “What about Pine Bluff?” I asked.
    “Pine Bluff,” said Mother, “is going to have to wait.”
