6
Saints, Sinners and Savables
At the petition drive on Sunday, May 10, my job was to greet the cars as they drove up and bring the petition for them to sign right up to the car window. Mother or Daddy would come by with the notary to check their driver’s license. No one even needed to get out of the car. Lots of people I knew came by. Mrs. Brewer, of course, and Reverend Mitchell from church. Even Mr. Harding and Miss Taylor from school.
    Late in the afternoon, Betty Jean and Pastor George stopped by to drop off all the signatures they had collected. I was thrilled to see that Liz and Curtis were with them. “We’ve been gathering names since nine this morning!” exclaimed Liz. “Only one person we asked refused to sign. Marlee, I think this just might work!”
    “You should have seen her,” said Curtis. “If someone was hesitant or nervous about signing, Liz just started talking, and by the time she was done, not only had the first person signed, but he’d gotten three of his friends to sign too.”
    “Liz can be very persuasive,” I said.
    “You can say that again,” said Curtis. Liz blushed, and he beamed at her, the way I’d always wished a boy would look at me.
    By Monday, STOP had enough names, but CROSS got their petitions in too, so all six board members were being recalled. The special school board election was set for Monday, May 25. That afternoon, Dr. Agar and Mrs. Brewer came to our house to talk to my parents about the next step for STOP.
    “We have a copy of the poll tax book listing all the registered voters in Little Rock,” said Mrs. Brewer. “We need to put their names, addresses and phone numbers onto note cards. Next, we’ll divide the city into sections, assign each section a ward captain, and give each captain a shoe box full of cards with the names of all the voters in their area. Block workers will then personally contact as many voters as possible before the election.”
    “Do you think that will help?” asked Mother.
    “It has in other cities when there was a tight election,” said Mrs. Brewer. “But we won’t win without the Negro vote.”
    “Pastor George and I will handle that,” said Betty Jean. There were already tea and cookies on the coffee table. But this time, instead of going back into the kitchen, she was standing in the doorway, listening to the conversation.
    “Good,” said Dr. Agar, “then there’s only one problem.”
    “What?” asked Daddy.
    “There are thirty thousand registered voters in Little Rock,” admitted Mrs. Brewer.
    “Thirty thousand?” repeated Daddy. “But the election is only two weeks away. By the time we get all the cards organized . . .”
    Mother shook her head. “It’s impossible.”
    But I was doing some calculations. “No, it’s not.”
    They all turned to look at me.
    “Thirty thousand names sounds like a lot,” I agreed. “But if you divide it up between thirty people, that’s only a thousand names each. If you figure it takes a minute per card, that’s a thousand minutes, or about seventeen hours. That’s not forever. It’s one long weekend.”
    They all stared at me. What can I say? I’ve always liked long division.
    “Marlee is very good at math.” Mother sounded proud.
    “If you have more people,” I said, “it’d take even less time.”
    Dr. Agar looked at Mrs. Brewer. She nodded. “We’ll see what we can do.”
For the next forty-eight hours, all the WEC members we could round up worked frantically, putting the names, addresses and phone numbers of all thirty thousand registered voters in Little Rock onto note cards. Miss Winthrop and Mrs. Dalton both came over, and they stayed working late into the night. Mrs. Brewer went to the county clerk’s office and got copies of the recall petitions. Everyone who signed the STOP petition was listed as someone we could count on for their support. Everyone who signed the CROSS petition was labeled as someone it probably wasn’t worth our time contacting. We were going to focus on those who weren’t on either list.
    While I copied names at home, Liz copied names at church. “We’ve got the saints, the sinners and the savables,” she’d commented to Pastor George. The joke was repeated, and Mrs. Brewer liked it so much, we started putting a halo in the upper right hand corner of each card for the saints, an X for the sinners, and a question mark for the savables. When we were done, there were one hundred shoe boxes stacked in our living room, full of three hundred cards each.
    The plan was simple: on election day, we had to get all the saints to the polls. We didn’t want to do anything to remind the sinners that there was an election going on, though Mrs. Brewer nixed Miss Winthrop’s idea of letting the air out of their car tires. We would spend our time on the savables, contacting them and trying to win them over to our cause.
    Mother kept one of the boxes for herself. Every minute she wasn’t at school she spent on the phone, or having tea, or just dropping in on neighbors we hadn’t talked to in years. At night, she’d tell Daddy and me about whom she’d contacted, and whom she’d won over.
    Betty Jean got her own shoe box of people in her neighborhood, and Daddy told her to make free use of our phone, so she got real good at dialing and cooking, sweet-talking and folding laundry. Her box was mainly full of saints and savables—the real problem was convincing people it was worth taking the time to vote.
    Liz organized some students from Philander Smith College to provide rides to the polls on election day. “People want to vote, but we have to make sure they can get there.” I helped with a rally STOP held on May 19 at Robinson Auditorium to get people energized about the election. Pastor George held a separate rally for Negroes at Dunbar Community Center the same evening.
    I thought it was odd that even though we were working together on a common goal, we still had separate rallies. But no one else said a word about it.
