6
Facing Fears
Tuesday afternoon in the rock crusher, I felt pretty down when I met Liz. “I’ve been doing so well!” I moaned. “Speaking up, saying what I mean. And then my mother had to come to school and ruin it all!”
    Liz and I were leaning against the big stone in the meadow and looking at the sky. “I don’t understand why you’re so upset. I thought you kind of liked JT.”
    I’d never told her what JT had called her when he’d found out she was colored. I didn’t see a reason to now. “That was ages ago,” I said. “JT is a jerk.”
    “Maybe you like someone else?” asked Liz. “Little Jimmy?”
    I laughed. “He’s four feet tall and as skinny as a bean pole.”
    She shrugged. “People grow. I always thought he was kind of nice.”
    He was kind of nice. On the float, asking about Liz, I'd thought he liked her too. And he’d brought me my homework on Valentine’s Day. Maybe Liz was right. Maybe I really should give him a second look. 
    “Come on,” said Liz. “It’s a beautiful day. Tommy has an extra-long practice. Two hours. There must be something I can do to cheer you up.”
    It was a beautiful day. It was only March[ CE26], but it was warm and the field was full of wild crocuses, jonquils and Indian paintbrush. When I was little, Judy and I would spend every afternoon like this in the rock crusher, picking flowers and wading in the creek.
    “Let’s catch crawdads,” I said.
    “Ugh,” said Liz. “Isn’t there something else you want to do?”
    I turned and looked at her in surprise. Liz was usually game for anything. “What’s wrong with crawdads?”
    Liz blushed. “I don’t like creepy-crawly things. Spiders. Roaches. Crawdads.”
    I had to keep myself from grinning. It made me feel good to know that there was something she was afraid of. “Isn’t it important to face your fears?” I asked.
    “Do I have to get in the water to catch them?”
    “Oh, yeah,” I said. “That’s the best part.”
    “Then, no.”
    “You weren’t afraid of turtles.”
    “They are reptiles. With a nice hard shell. And no scary pinchers.”
    “Come on, Liz.”
    She looked at me a long time. “What are you afraid of?”
    “Talking.”
    Liz laughed. “Besides that.”
    I thought for a moment. “Heights.”
    “Fine,” said Liz. “I’ll catch those crawdad thingies with you, but then you have to climb a tree with me.”
    “Facing our fears, huh?”
    “You know it.”
    And because I realized I wasn’t thinking about JT or Mother or the roller-skating party anymore, I agreed.
Which is how we found ourselves with our shoes and socks off, holding our skirts up as we waded in the creek. The water was cold, but the sun was warm on our backs. “My toes are freezing,” complained Liz.
    I ignored her. “What you have to do is flip over a rock or old log or something. Anything where a crawdad might like to hide.”
    I flipped over a rock. There was a huge crawdad, six inches long, just sitting there. I scooped it up with an old tin can we had found in the woods and brought it over to show Liz.
    She took one look at it and shivered. I grinned and dumped it back into the stream.
    “Your turn now,” I said. Liz turned over a rock or two, but found nothing.
    “You need bigger rocks,” I said, and pointed to a small boulder a few feet away.
    It was heavy, so I helped Liz flip it over. “I see one!” she exclaimed, and was so excited, she dropped her skirt in the water.
    I handed her the can. “Scoop it up.”
    “It might pinch me.”
    “Put the can in the water, a few inches behind the crawdad, but far enough away that you don’t scare it.”
    Liz, moving slowly, placed the can into a crevice between two stones directly behind the crawdad. I handed her a stick. “Now wiggle the stick in front of the little guy. Pretend you’re a fish or a snapping turtle or something.”
    Liz looked doubtful, but splashed the stick in the water right in front of the crawdad. Just like I knew it would, it moved a few steps backward.
    “Again,” I said. “Keep him moving back into the can.”
    Liz didn’t breathe as she wiggled the stick. The crawdad moved into the can. Only one little pincher was peeking out.
    “What now?” whispered Liz.
    “Now you pick it up.”
    Liz bent over and put her hands in the water. She reached for the can, and slowly drew it out of the water. She was so quiet we could hear the crawdad scrabbling inside. “I got it!” she breathed.
    “Not so bad, was it?”
    Liz couldn’t stop grinning. “Come on,” she said. “Let’s catch some more.”
An hour later, it was my turn. We stood in front of a huge oak tree on the edge of the meadow. I looked up. “You expect me to climb this?” I asked.
    “Hey,” said Liz. “I caught those creepy little things.”
    “You liked it,” I said.
    “Well, then, maybe you will too.”
    I sighed. “What do I do first?”
    “Reach up and grab that branch,” said Liz.
    I did so.
    “Now pull yourself up.”
    I gave her a look.
    “Just that branch,” Liz said. “You don’t have to go any higher.”
    So I pulled, and she pushed, and then I was up in the tree, my arms wrapped around the trunk. You’d think that after going up in an airplane, climbing a tree would be easy. But it wasn’t. You can’t fall out of a plane. There’s a seat belt. And the wind blows, but it’s outside, not trying to loosen your grip on the branches. I felt dizzy and closed my eyes and started to count . . . 2, 3, 5, 7 . . . 
    Then I felt Liz’s hand on my shoulder. “Open your eyes,” she said.
    I did. I was only about five feet off the ground, but already I was surrounded by leaves and oak flowers. It was a different world. There were even a few old bunches of acorns from last fall, clinging to the branches.
    “Are you all right?”
    I nodded. And it was true. My heart was beating fast and I was scared, but I knew that feeling now. I’d had it before. When I did the presentation at school and when I got on the airplane, and both times I’d been okay.
    “All you have to do,” said Liz slowly, “is watch my hands and feet. Put your hands where I put my hands. Place your feet where my feet go, and you’ll be fine.”
    I nodded.
    Liz started to climb. I stared at her white lace socks and saddle shoes, and I watched where her right hand went (she had a bit of dirt under her thumb) and where her left hand went (there was a bit of old red nail polish on her ring finger), and I repeated times tables in my head until I was able to follow her. Pretty soon, we were high enough that I could feel the tree swaying back and forth in the wind.
    “It’s okay,” said Liz. “It’s not going to blow over or anything.”
    But I wasn’t worried. “It’s like flying,” I said. “The airplane rocks like that when you take off.”
    “Isn’t the view amazing?” Liz sighed.
    I was still staring at her feet. Taking a deep breath, I gripped the tree tighter and wrenched my gaze away from her saddle shoes.
    The view was beautiful. In one direction, I could see the large rock[s27] we liked to sit on, and in the other, the rolling Arkansas hills. The late-afternoon sun turned all the new light green leaves to gold, like King Midas had been walking through the forest.
    “It worked,” I said. “You cheered me up.”
    Liz didn’t say a word. She didn’t have to. We stayed in the tree a long time, watching the leaves and the squirrels and listening to the birds. Together.
