3
After the Speech
Brave and perceptive and smart. My mother thought I was brave and perceptive and smart. That’s all I could think of. It was a funny feeling. I didn’t remember hearing her say that before, but it was really nice. We were almost home by the time I realized that no one had said anything about Pine Bluff since Miss Winthrop had shown up at our door. Suddenly, the nice feelings evaporated, and I couldn’t stop wondering if I was going to have to pack my bags when I got home.
    “Daddy?” I asked.
    “Yes, Marlee?”
    “Are you still going to send me away?”
    He didn’t answer.
    “Because I’d really like to stay. I know I’ve been disobedient and you can punish me, but—”
    “But Red. . .”
    “There have been threats before. Those notes you got in our newspaper, remember? And the phone calls.  You didn’t send me away then.”
    Daddy was silent.
    “Marlee has a point,” said Mother. “You didn’t even quit that group when I asked you to. You said it was important to take a stand.”
“And I’ve been thinking,” I went on. “Those Negro students who went to Central last year with Judy and David. The Little Rock Nine. They were in danger. But they didn’t run away. They were brave. They kept going to school, even though it was scary. Even though their parents must have been worried about them. They kept going, because they’d believed in something. Believed they had a responsibility to make things better. Believed they could make things better, even though they were still just kids.     I think I’d like to be like them.”
    I held my breath.
    “If you stay . . . ,” Daddy said.
    Then I knew I’d won.
    “I said, if you stay, I don’t want you seeing that girl anymore.”
    “But—”
    “I mean it, Marlee.”
    In the past, I would have accepted what he said. At least I wouldn’t have said anything. But things were different now. I was taking a stand. “I won’t meet her in public anymore,” I promised, “but she is a really good friend. I’d still like to talk to her on the phone.”
    Daddy didn’t say anything.
    “Her parents would have to agree,” said Mother finally. “I’ll give them a call in the morning.”
    “All right,” agreed Daddy.  
    “Sounds fair to me.” I didn’t say a word the rest of the way home, too scared he’d change his mind.
That night, I was just about to turn out the light when I realized there was something I needed to do. Daddy was still in the kitchen, talking on the phone. I went to Mother and Daddy’s bedroom and knocked on the door.
    “Come in,” said Mother.
    She was sitting in bed, cold cream on her face, in an old flannel nightgown, reading a book. I’d had a fancy speech rehearsed in my head, but when I saw her there, all normal and ordinary, it suddenly seemed like too much and all I said was, “Thank you.”
    “I figured,” said Mother, “if you could work up the courage to tell me the truth about JT, you were brave enough to stay home.
    Mother held out her arms then, and if I ran into them and both our eyes filled with tears, I’m not admitting it, because it sounds too darn corny, and it wasn’t corny at all. It was nice. For a moment, I got to be four again, and my mother was the one who could make everything okay.
