5
Maybe Brave
The next morning when I woke up, I had an idea. I was pretty sure Mother wouldn’t like it, but at least I could ask. “Mother?” I said over breakfast.
    “Hmm.” She didn’t look up from the paper.
    “Any chance you’d let me stay home from school today so I can help STOP get a head start on those petitions?” The words came out in a rush.
    Mother thought for a long time. “I guess so.”
    “Really?”
    She nodded. “In fact, I think I might call in sick myself and give you a hand.”
    I was too shocked to say a word.
    “Unless, you’d rather go with Miss Winthrop,” Mother said, suddenly very interested in her toast.
    “No,” I said. “I’d rather go with you.”
    Mother smiled.
    “Does this mean you think it’s okay if Judy goes to school with Negroes now?” I asked.
    “You know,” said Mother, “I think it does.”
Two hours later we’d been up and down our street and had a handful of new names on our petition. Old Mrs. Chapman was the first one to sign. Turned out, before she was married, she was a music teacher.
    Mrs. Madison (the mother of Jill, the little girl I’d taken trick-or-treating) was a different story. Mother barely got out what we were doing before Mrs. Madison started to scold us. “Maurine Nisbett, what is a smart woman like you doing with a group like that?
    Mother was flustered. “Well, Debra, I don’t think—”
    “I’m ashamed of you, Maurine, supporting those communist race mixers!”
    Mother took a deep breath. “If you would just listen to what I—”
    Mrs. Madison slammed the door in our faces.
    “Well, I never!” said Mother, which was about as close as she ever got to swearing.
A few houses later, I saw Sally and her mother walking around as well. I waved and ran to meet Sally in the street. “You’re working for STOP too?” I asked.
    Sally stuck her nose up in the air, so high a bat could fly right in it. “Of course not,” she sniffed. “We’re with CROSS.”
    “What’s that?”
    “The Committee to Retain Our Segregated Schools. We’re working to keep the schools segregated.”
    “Oh,” I said. “I guess I thought after what you said at the skating rink you’d—”
    Sally grabbed my arm and pulled me away from where our mothers were trying to pretend they hadn’t just realized they were on opposite sides. “Truthfully,” Sally said, “I don’t much care which side of this issue I’m on, as long as I get to skip school and get new clothes. Mother bought me this.” She pointed to her new sweater set. “Just in case a TV reporter comes by and we get to be on television. I want to look my best.”
    Pure Sally. “Oh,” I said. “Well, good luck. With getting on TV, I mean.”
    As I walked off, Sally called, “Hey, Marlee!”
    I looked back at her.
    “Good luck to you too,” said Sally.
    “Thanks.”
    We smiled and went our separate ways. For the first time in ages, I felt okay about Sally. She was only against integration because he mother was. Eventually, she’d come around.
    “Are you still friends with Sally McDaniels?” Mother asked. “After JT, I just thought I’d better ask, because . . .”
    “Yeah,” I replied. “I think I am.”
At lunchtime, we took a break and went to Krystal to grab a burger. On the way into the restaurant, I noticed someone had placed a bunch of advertisements by the front door. I bent down to pick one up.
    It was a card inviting us to join the KKK.
    “What is it?” asked Mother.
    I handed the card to her.
    She bit her lip. “Daddy found some of these at a newsstand last week.” She glanced around. “Quick. Let’s pick them all up.”
    After we had gathered and thrown away all the cards, we went inside to order. I’d lost my appetite, but Mother insisted I get a burger, fries and a chocolate shake. She ordered a cheeseburger, onion rings and a cherry Coke. We shared a little tub of ketchup.
    “This is nice,” she said, as we took turns dipping into the ketchup. “We should do this again soon. Spend time together, I mean. Maybe go to the zoo?”
    I nodded. “I’d like that.”
    “It’s not too babyish for you?” Mother asked.
    “No, I love the zoo.”
    “You always did,” she said. “Especially the lions.”
    “Really?” I asked.
    “Do you remember when we moved to our house?” asked Mother.
    I shook my head.
    “You had just turned four. It was our first night in the house, and the lions started roaring. Judy, David and I were terrified. But you went right over to look out the window. You weren’t scared of getting eaten; you wanted to see them.”
    “I was only four,” I said. “I didn’t know any better.”
    Mother shook her head. “No, you were brave. Like I said at the PTA meeting.”
    “You were just giving a speech.”
    “No,” said Mother. “I meant it.”
    I finished the last of my chocolate shake. Brave? That was crazy. But if you had told me Mother would ever let me skip school, I would have said that was crazy too. Brave? Maybe I was.
The next day at school, JT had a black eye. He kept his head down all day, but I saw it, we all did, and after math in the hallway, this time I cornered him.
    “What happened to you?” I asked.
    “Red.”
    “Your brother hit you?”
    JT shrugged. “Not the first time.”
    “Why don’t your parents do anything?”
    “I didn’t tell them! They think I ran into a tree.”
    I was pretty sure they didn’t believe that. “Why?”
    “I told you, Red thought I’d betrayed him. I hadn’t, but”—he gestured for me to come closer—“the dynamite is locked in the trunk of his car. I saw it this morning, and he saw that I saw it.” He pointed to his eye. “He said if I say anything to Mother or Father, he’ll kill me.” JT bit his lip. “But he didn’t say anything about telling you.”
    “Thank you, JT.”
    He nodded.
    Sally and Nora walked up then, and we jumped apart. “What’s wrong with you two?” Sally asked. I shook my head and ran off.
    As soon as Daddy got home, I told him what JT had said. Daddy frowned, but called his friend at the police station. His face was grim when he hung up. “They already searched Red’s car. There was nothing there.”
    “He moved it,” I said.
    “Maybe,” said Daddy. “Or maybe JT was mistaken. Or lying to upset you. In any case, try not to worry. The grown-ups will take charge of things.”
    I nodded, but what I was really thinking was, So far they aren’t doing a very good job.
