 11
Sitting with Fear
My dad was in the kitchen with Katarina, both of them wearing matching aprons. My father, who only cooked grilled cheese and frozen pizza at home, was chopping an onion with a knife that looked big enough to decapitate Bambi. Katarina was stirring something thick and meaty in a big pot on the stove. A new song started on the CD player, and they sang together, “La donna è mobile qual piuma al vento[JL176][KL177]!” They looked like something out of a pasta ad.
    I wasn’t sure if I wanted to laugh or cry. I was so exhausted, I just stood there for a moment, staring. The music was loud, and they hadn’t heard us come in. Finally, Dad turned and noticed me standing there. “Oh, Becca!” he called. “Good! You’re home.”
    “Schatzi!” Katarina ran over and tried to give me a big hug. I jerked away.
    I saw her flinch and felt a little bad. I didn’t want to hurt her feelings, but . . . “What’s going on?” I sounded angrier than I meant to, but I just wanted to flop down on the couch.
    Dad didn’t notice. “Katarina and I are cooking dinner to celebrate your first full day in Austria. We’re making goulash!”
    I could see my dreams of Full House and grilled cheese going up in smoke, as surely as if someone had tossed a cast-iron frying pan into the TV. So while Felix said “Yum” and Sara licked her lips, I stormed up the stairs to my room.
    Okay, so maybe it wasn’t my finest hour.
    I threw myself down onto my bed, not sure if I was angry or sad. I wanted to talk to my mom, but when I stood up to get the phone, I remembered I was in Austria. And unlike at my Virginia home, here I didn’t have a phone line in my room. (Dad had given me some long explanation about a statewide monopoly and the expense of phone lines and blah blah blah.) There was only one phone in the house—and it was in the kitchen.
    I burst out crying again.
    There was a knock on my door.
    “Go away,” I cried.
    “Becca,” I heard Dad ask, “what’s going on?”
    “Nothing,” I blubbered.
    “Sara said there was an . . . incident at the Prater today and . . .”
    “I don’t want to talk about it.”
    “Okay.” He paused. “Could you please come downstairs? Dinner is almost ready.”
    “No.”
    “Rebecca, we have guests.”
    “I don’t care.”
    “Young lady, I do not . . .”
    “Just leave me alone!”
    I could hear him lurking outside the door, standing on a squeaky floorboard and shifting his weight from one foot to the other. “Fine,” he said finally.
    I listened to him walk back down the stairs. “I don’t understand,” he said, loud enough for me to hear. “She was doing so much better.”
    My heart sank. He was frustrated with me. But I had been doing better. Until he’d gone and moved to Austria! I was picking up my Doomsday Journal when there was another knock at the door.
    It was Katarina. “Becca,” she cooed, “are you feeling okay?”
    I didn’t bother to answer.
    “I bet you’re tired from a long day of sightseeing. I’ve got some tomato and mozzarella on the table for you to eat while the goulash is finishing up.”
    “I’m not hungry,” I lied. I was starving. McDonald’s seemed like a long, long time ago in a galaxy far, far away.
    “All right.” Through the door I could hear her start to leave, then pause. “Do you not like Verdi? I could put on some Mozart.”
    “Just go away!” I snapped.
    She did.
    They left me alone for about twenty minutes. I sat at the small desk, writing down all the horrible things that had happened that day. There were some good things too—like the Apfelstrudel and toothache Jesus and even McDonald’s, but I didn’t know where to put those. It was a Doomsday Journal, not rainbows and butterflies. I was mulling it over when there was another knock at my door. “I don’t want to talk!”
    But this time the door opened, and Sara walked in. I was too surprised to protest when she sat down on my bed. “Good,” she said. “Because I want you to listen to my story.”
    Okay, so that was not what I’d expected. I studied her for a moment. Her green[SB179][KL180]-streaked hair was limp from the heat. She had washed her face, and without the eyeliner and lipstick, she looked much younger. But she didn’t look pitying, like Katarina and Dad had sounded. She looked serious, and suddenly I was curious.
    “I grew up in Sarajevo,” she started. “You know where that is?”
    “In Bosnia. It used to be part of Yugoslavia.”
    “Yes, Sarajevo is a beautiful city. There is a river that runs through the middle—the Miljacka. We can see the bridge across the river from our apartment. In summer, I like to sit on the riverbank with my friends. In the evening, Mama buys us ice cream, and the three of us walk across the bridge.”
    “What about your father?” I asked.
    “He died in a car accident when Eldin was a baby. It was very sad, but still . . . we were happy. Mama was math teacher at the elementary school. She loves flowers so much our whole apartment was full of them. I like music and dancing, and I planned to be a language teacher like my father. Everyone said I had his gift.
    “Sarajevo was a very diverse and exciting place. The city was mainly Muslim, but Serbs and Croats lived there too. They were Orthodox Christians or Roman Catholic, but for years, it did not matter. We all went to the same school and lived in the same apartment buildings and ate the same ice cream.”
    “Wasn’t Yugoslavia a communist country?” I asked.
    “Yes, it became communist after World War II.”
    “I thought communism didn’t allow religion.”
    Sara shrugged. “We had no official religion. But everyone knew their own religion and celebrated with family and friends. Catholic kids get Christmas presents in December, Serbs in January, and we have Ramadan. The dates change every year, but our neighbors always came over to eat Eid cake.”
    “So what happened?” I asked.
    “How to explain?” She sighed. “There were lots of boring referendums and talk of independent states. The leader of Serbian Republic—Slobodan Milošević—wanted get rid of Muslims and Catholics in other republics. Wanted to have a ‘pure’ Yugoslavia. I thought that was nonsense, just politicians talking. It had nothing to do with me.
    “Until my violin teacher sent Mama a note saying she would not give me lessons anymore. Because she was a good Serb and we are Muslim. Then my dance partner not show up at the studio the next week. At least he stopped by our apartment to say it not personal. They were Croats and had nothing against Muslims, but his father did not want to upset his neighbors, so he not allowed to associate with me anymore.”
    “That’s awful!”
    Sara nodded. “Snipers moved into the hills around the city. There was no more swimming or ice cream or even school. We had to close all the blinds in our apartment so snipers not target us. Sometimes we ate dinner in the bathroom. It was the only room with no windows, which made it the safest. But without sunlight, all of Mama’s flowers died.
    “And then the shelling started. I remember the first night bombs fell. We went down to the cellar. I not sleep at all.”
    I thought about Sara and her mother and brother trying to sleep in a cellar with bombs falling overhead. And I had gotten terrified about going on a Ferris wheel? “I’m sorry,” I said. “That sounds awful. You must think I’m an idiot for freaking out about a ride!”
    “No.” Sara looked surprised. “That not point of story. I only try to tell you, I understand fear. I cry all that first night. I not brave at all. So you not need to be embarrassed.”
    “But you were actually in danger!” I said. “You had a reason to feel afraid.”
    “Fear is strange. I think sometimes our bodies get confused. Scared is good if you can do something. If you can leave. It is why I got on the bus and left Sarajevo. But when I was stuck there in the cellar, fear did no good. I learned if you sit with fear long enough, it goes away.”
    “I don’t understand.”
    “My first night in bomb shelter, I not sleep at all. Third night, I sleep one hour. And by sixth, I take blanket and curl up to sleep. I learn to deal with fear. And you will too.”
    I shook my head.
    “You will,” she insisted. “But now, time for dinner.”
    I wasn’t sure that she was right about me learning [KL182]to sit with fear, but I was hungry. So when she stood up and left my room, I followed her.

