 12
Käfer
Felix and Dad were already seated at the table when Sara and I came down the stairs. Katarina was serving big ladlefuls of a thick reddish stew into bowls. “Oh, hello, Schatzi,” she said brightly to me, as if my freak-out had never happened.
    Dad looked a bit warier but patted my arm kindly. “You feeling better?” he asked.
    “Yeah,” I said awkwardly. “Sorry. I was just tired.”
    I sat down. No one spoke. Sara passed me a round roll. I noticed how she tore the bread and then dipped a piece into the stew. I did the same.
    Okay, I gotta admit, it was delicious. The beef was tender, and the sauce was a rich tomatoey gravy. I took another bite. “It’s really good.”
    The tension in the room relaxed a bit. I was about to take another bite when Felix started screaming.
    “Käfer!”
    I didn’t know what that meant.
    But he said it again. “Käfer!” And with such intensity, I started to get concerned.
    “In der Suppe!” he screamed. He pointed at his bowl of goulash.
    Whatever it was, it seemed bad. I looked down at my bowl. There was meat and the tomato sauce. Onions. Tiny black sesame seeds. It tasted good. One of my favorite things I’d eaten since arriving in . . . Wait a second.
    The sesame seeds were moving.
    I looked closer. Maybe I had just hit them with my spoon. Nope. Definitely moving. I had a sinking feeling. Maybe they weren’t toasted sesame seeds. Maybe they were . . .
    “Bugs!” Dad exclaimed and jumped up from his chair so fast, he knocked his water glass over.
    Everything seemed to happen at once then. Dad ran for a towel to mop up the water. Katarina started crying. Felix kept yelling, “Käfer! Käfer!” I stared at my bowl. There were hundreds of little black beetles, swimming happily around. And I had just [JL183][KL184]eaten this. There wasn’t even a page in my Doomsday Journal for something this gross.
    Then Sara started laughing. Big belly laughs. Gasping so hard, she could barely breathe. “So funny!” She choked. “Katarina added more and more paprika.”
    Dad guffawed as he mopped up the water. “Yeah. She kept saying, ‘It’s not red enough.’”
    Katarina continued to sob.
    Felix poked at his bowl with a sour expression on his face. “Did anyone look at the jar?”
    “No!” Dad was laughing now. “We just kept adding more.”
    Katarina looked absolutely stricken. “I just wanted a nice traditional meal for Rebecca! Oh Gott, everything goes wrong for me.” Her mascara ran down her face. Dad went over and put an arm around her shoulders.
    “There, there, sweetie,” Dad said calmly. “It was just an accident. We know you didn’t mean to . . .”
    “Serve us bugs?” Felix added.
    Then he began to laugh too.
    I wasn’t sure what to do. Then I remembered I actually did have a page in Doomsday Journal #1 about eating bugs. “My friend Chrissy and I once found a study that said people accidentally eat a lot of bugs each year.”
    Katarina stopped crying. “Really?” she asked.
    I nodded. “Like two pounds or something.”
    “Gross!” said Felix.
    “Yeah,” I agreed. “But it’s not dangerous.”
    Dad smiled at me. “Good to know.”
    Sara walked into the kitchen and came back with the jar of paprika. She held it up, tried to say something, and burst into laughter. Felix grabbed the jar from her and shook it.
    Even from across the table, I could see all the insects crawling around inside. I started laughing then, so hard I was clutching my stomach and tears were streaming from my eyes.
    Finally, Katarina started to giggle too. We threw the jar from person to person so we could all inspect the uninvited guests at our dinner.
    “Oh no,” Katarina sighed when she finally got control of herself again. “We’ll have to throw it all out.”
    “You know what?” I admitted. “I really felt like grilled cheese anyway.”
    “What is grilled cheese?” asked Sara.
    “Gegrillter Käsetoast,” translated Felix.
    “Oh yeah,” said Dad. “I make a mean grilled cheese.”
    Katarina looked in the fridge. “We have raclette and emmentaler. But no toast bread.”
    Felix jumped up. “I’ll go to the store.”
    “Becca and I clean up,” said Sara.
    “Okay,” I said.
    “You rest,” Dad said to Katarina.
    We all got to work. Sara helped me scrape all the meat from the bowls into the small trash can in the kitchen. “It’s a shame,” I said, pouring the rest of the meat from the pot into the trash. “The goulash really tasted good.”
    “We’ll make it again sometime,” Dad said.
    Sara made Katarina a cup of tea, and they sat on the couch, chatting, while Dad and I worked in the kitchen, cutting more tomatoes for the sandwiches, frying up a bit of bacon. It felt nice working next to my dad, side by side.
    “You know,” Dad said as he removed the bacon from the pan. “I was thinking.”
    “About what?” I asked.
    “About how I was pretty tired when I first arrived here. All the new stuff. New foods and language.” He paused. “Maybe it wasn’t the best idea to go along with Katarina’s plan for a big dinner on your first night here. Maybe I should have told her no. Maybe you would rather have had a quiet dinner with your dad.”
    My eyes teared up again.
    “Yeah,” I whispered.
    “What do you say we do that tomorrow night? We’ll have spaghetti with sauce from a jar. Or peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwiches!”
    “Peanut butter and jelly,” I said.
    “The jam here is scrumptious.”
    “Thanks.” I concentrated carefully on the tomato I was slicing, but it still made my eyes water as if it were an onion.
    Dad put his arm around me and gave me a little hug. “I’m looking forward to it.”
    “Me too.”
    Felix came back with the “toast bread,” which turned out to be what we call normal bread. Dad heated up a big frying pan and made the best grilled cheese sandwiches I’d ever had, with tomatoes and bacon and strange cheeses that tasted so much better than the fake orange American stuff.
    When Katarina and Felix and Sara finally went home, Dad and I did the dishes together. I couldn’t help thinking about The Sound of Music and that awful first dinner Maria has with the kids, when they put a pine cone on her seat. Everyone ends up crying in that scene. But it works out okay for them in the end. Maybe it would for me too.

