 15
The Police Station
A couple of days after her nightmare, Sara, Felix, and I stopped at the Julius Meinl grocery store on the corner by the bus stop to buy a picnic lunch. We picked out salami and fresh bread, a hunk of cheese, a bunch of peaches, and a big bottle of sparkling mineral water.
    “We have picnic at the zoo,” Sara announced once we were settled on the streetcar. “But I need to make a stop first.”
    “Where?” I asked.
    “Polizei[JL214][KL215],” Sara replied.
    “Police,” Felix translated without looking up from his book. He had [JL216][KL217]finished The Federalist Papers and was now reading a book about the Revolutionary War.
    “Why do we need to go there?”
    “I need a new stamp in my passport,” Sara said.
    Sara balanced the basket of food on her lap. It rattled as she bounced her knees up and down. I noticed that she had pinned her hair back with a barrette that morning so that the streak of green was barely visible. She had on about half as much makeup as normal, and although I could see the chain, her crescent necklace was tucked away, hidden in her shirt. For once, she wasn’t even wearing all black; instead she wore a jean skirt, a white T-shirt, and sandals.
    Sara stood up suddenly, ushering us off the streetcar at an unfamiliar stop. We were on a busy street, more run-down than where Dad and Katarina lived and not as grand as the downtown. A gray stone building lurked in front of us.
    Sara paused on the steps. She glanced at the door, then away, then back at the door. Suddenly, she sat down on the front step. “I rest a minute,” Sara said. She put the basket down beside her, then put her elbows on her knees and cradled her head in her hands. Her breathing sounded loud—as if she were exhausted from running a race. But we’d been on the streetcar.
    Felix looked confused, but I knew what was going on. She was having an anxiety attack! It was odd to see it happen to someone else. Every time it had happened to me, I’d felt so conspicuous. And yet unless you actually knew her, it looked like Sara was just resting after a strenuous walk.
    Felix stood frozen, but I sat down next to her. “Sara,” I murmured.
    She didn’t answer.
    I put a hand on her shoulder, like Mom always did when I was upset. “I have a Benadryl in my purse,” I offered. “Sometimes that helps me when . . .”
    Sara shook her head. She was singing to herself, so softly it was almost a hum.
    “What are you singing?” Felix asked.
    “La Traviata,” she whispered. “Italian opera by Verdi.”
    Oh! It was the opera we’d listened to the other night.
    Sara continued singing. “Di quell’amor ch’è palpito dell’universo intero.”
    “What does it mean?” Felix asked.
    “Love is the heartbeat of universe. Or maybe breath.” She spoke with her eyes closed. “Translated different ways. But to me it means, listen to the mystery and beauty in the universe.”
    Felix sat down on the other side of Sara, and we all stopped and listened. Honestly, I didn’t hear any mystery or beauty. I heard a car honk, a streetcar rattle by, a dog bark, a baby crying in a stroller. But Sara must have heard something, because she took two long, deep breaths—Dr. Teresa would have been proud—and opened her eyes.
    “Thank you for patience.” She reached out and squeezed Felix’s and my hands. “Police make me worry.”
    “Why?” I asked.
    “In Sarajevo, ethnic background became more important than the law. The police came to ‘talk’ to our neighbor, and when they left, he had a broken arm.”
    Sara took another deep breath, stood up, and smoothed the wrinkles out of her skirt. “You two say nothing,” Sara said. “Unless policeman ask you a question. Then say, ‘Sara family friend.’ Not nanny. Not au pair.”
    “But you are our au pair.” I was confused. My parents didn’t have too many rules, but “Don’t lie to the police” was definitely one of them.
    “No,” Sara said firmly, almost to herself. “I family friend. The money Katarina and Ben give me is not salary—only so you and Felix have fun.”
    “But . . .”
    Felix nudged me in the ribs. He leaned close and whispered in my ear. “Sara doesn’t have a work permit. If they found out she had a job, they could send her back to Bosnia!”
    “There’s a war going on! They wouldn’t do that.”
    Sara stared at me, her big green eyes round and serious. “Yes, they would.”
    I thought about the little dog on the bridge. “Family friend,” I agreed.
    We all turned together to walk up the front steps. The wooden door was twice our height, making the building look like a fortress. A smaller door was cut out of the larger one. Sara grasped the metal handle and pulled it open.
    The temperature dropped what felt like twenty degrees as soon as we stepped inside. The big stone buildings in Austria might not have air-conditioning, but the solid rocks they were built from were so thick and dense, they kept the air inside cool and dry. Still, as we walked into the room, a cold sweat ran down my neck.
    There were hard wooden benches lining the perimeter of the vestibule—and they were all filled with people. Most looked tired and disheveled; many carried suitcases or bags, as if this were an airport or a train depot instead of a police station. There were families, old people, single men, even a woman holding a whimpering baby. Sara went up to the woman and said a few words to her in a language that didn’t sound like German. I looked at Felix.
    “Bosnian,” he whispered.
    I couldn’t understand what Sara was saying, of course, but I caught a few words. Petra Tahirović? Eldin Tahirović? The woman shook her head sadly. Sara thanked her and moved on. There was a girl a few feet on who looked about my age, staring[JL219] at her old boots. Sara reached into our basket and handed her a peach. The girl bit into it immediately, the juice running down her chin.
    Up ahead, a police officer in uniform was sitting behind a counter. Sara walked up to him and asked a question in her clear, crisp German. The man pointed down a long corridor, and we turned to go.
    As I was following Sara, an old man grabbed onto the strap of my purse. “American? American?!” he called desperately.
    Sara exchanged a few words with him in her language, and he let go. We kept walking.
    Even though we were in a police station, it had been kind of scary. I clutched my purse closer to me. There wasn’t much inside, just my bus pass, some coins in case I needed to use the restroom or make a phone call, and my passport. I had a copy at home in case it was lost, but I often needed it as an ID. “Austrians like paperwork,” Dad had told me. I’d already shown it twice at a museum for a student discount.[JL220][KL221]
    “What did that man want?” I asked.
    “The old man was confused,” said Sara. “He thought you could help him. He has a cousin in New York.”
    “How did he know I was an American?” I whispered to Felix.
    “Your shoes,” he said.
    I glanced down at my sneakers.
    “Only Americans wear Turnschuhe when they aren’t playing sports,” Felix explained.
    The hall seemed to go on forever. Sara led us up a flight of stairs and into another waiting room, which was even more crowded than the first. An old woman was weeping silently in the corner.
    We got in line [JL222][KL223]in front of another desk. Sara shifted the picnic basket in her arms, as if it were getting heavy. I took it from her without a word.
    The police officer handed the man in front of us a clipboard full of papers and rattled off a series of instructions in German. The man looked bewildered. The police officer repeated his words, only louder this time. The man shook his head.
    “Entschuldigung,” Sara said in a small but clear voice. “Darf ich übersetzen?”
    The police officer nodded.
    Sara pointed to the papers, and she must have explained what to do, because the man clutched his hands together and thanked her (that was clear even if I didn’t understand the words). He went to squeeze in on the bench, next to the weeping woman in the corner.
    Then it was our turn. “Sie sprechen aber gut Deutsch,” the officer said as Sara stepped up to his desk.
    “Danke,” she replied.
    “He complimented her German,” Felix whispered in my ear.
    The officer and Sara spoke for a minute longer. Sara pointed to Felix and said, “Österreicher.” Then to me and said, “Amerikanerin.”
    The officer broke into a grin then. “American, eh?[JL224]” Then he added in heavily accented English, “I visit New York and Washington last year.”
    “I live outside Washington!” I said before I remembered I wasn’t supposed to speak. “In Alexandria, Virginia.”
    “George Washington home!” he exclaimed. “I visit.”
    We smiled at each other. Then he handed Sara a thick clipboard of papers. “You go that line,” he added in English, pointing to a door down the hall. “Is shorter.” And he winked.
    We waited in yet another room, with another line, while Sara filled out the papers. I wasn’t sure quite what to think. On the one hand, the police officer had been friendly and nice. On the other, it didn’t seem quite fair that we got to wait in the shorter line because he’d once visited Mount Vernon.
    The actual stamp only took a minute or two, and pretty soon, we were back outside, standing on the steps of the police station. I blinked in the bright sunlight.
    “Never been so quick before,” Sara said, even though we’d been there over an hour. It hadn’t seemed quick to me. “We had pig.”
    “What?” I asked. “Pig?”
    Felix laughed. “Sara, you can’t say that in English.” He turned to me. “In German, there is an expression: Ich habe Schwein gehabt. It means I was lucky. But literally, it’s I had pig.”
    “Why is having pig good luck?” I asked.
    “In the old days, if [JL225]you had a pig, you were considered well-off,” explained Felix. “Around New Years, everyone gives out tiny plastic pigs for good luck. Or you can buy little marzipan piggies and eat them.”
    I smiled[JL227][KL228]. “That’s weird.”
    “Maybe,” Sara said. “But today, I helped translate and I got my stamp. I say, we had pig!” She held up her passport and shook it in the air.
    “Don’t lose it!” I warned.
    “I make a copy,” Sara said.
    “You two worry too much,” said Felix.
    “It’s a sensible precaution,” I argued.
    “Like not eating eggs?” Felix asked.
    I glared at him.
    “Kinder, Kinder,” Sara said. “Time for zoo!”

