 18
The Egg
This time we took the bus in the opposite direction, away from the city. “Lovely day to visit a farm,” Sara said. “See cows. Feed happy chickens.”
    I scowled. “I’m not eating—"
    “No eating,” Sara agreed. “Just meet animals.”
    The bus took us up into the hills outside of Vienna. It was a pretty ride; I’ll give Sara that. Finally, we got off at an isolated house with a sign that read, “Gasthof Müller.”
    It was big yellow house, the same color as Schönbrunn Palace, with dark wooden balconies and window boxes overflowing with flowers. A woman with gray hair in braids pinned up on her head came out carrying a tray of drinks. She was wearing a dirndl, her dress light green with a pink apron.
    Sara spoke rapidly in German to the woman for a moment. The woman looked confused at first, then her face brightened. “Grüß Gott!” she said.
    “This is Frau Müller,” Sara said.
    I shook her hand.
    “Meine Tochter zeigt Ihnen die Tiere,” the woman said.
    “She said her daughter will show us the animals,” Felix translated.
    We followed her around the back of the house to what appeared to be a small outdoor restaurant. Long wooden tables sat in the sunlight, covered by an awning overgrown with grapevines for shade. There were two other groups there, drinking and chatting in the dappled light.
    A moment later her daughter came out of the house. She looked about my age. Unlike her mother, she wore jeans and a T-shirt. Honestly, she wouldn’t have looked out of place at my school.
    “Hi,” she said shyly. “I’m Tanja. You want to see animals?” she asked in English. She had a thicker accent than Felix.
    “Ja, bitte,” said Sara.
    “Come,” she said.
    There was a small barn beside the house. Inside was a large white cow with brown spots, chewing some hay. “This is our milk cow, Gertrude,” she said, patting the big animal on the nose. “We call her Gerti.”
    I was a city girl. I mean, I’d seen cows before, of course, but usually from the car as we drove by. I hadn’t realized they were quite so . . . big.
    “You can pet her,” Tanja said.
    I looked at the stall. It was made of strong dark wood. It looked like it would hold. Cautiously, I patted the cow’s nose, as Tanja had done. The cow ignored me.
    In a stall next to the cow were two goats. “Max and Moritz,” Tanja told us. “Even though they are girls. They make good cheese.”
    Outside the small barn was a pigpen. “Franz, Fritz, and Frederike.” The girl turned to look at me. “But you want to meet chickens,” she said.
    I nodded.
    Behind the barn was a small red henhouse painted neatly with white trim. In front of the house was a fenced area. Four chickens ran around, with red combs and a few black specks in their otherwise cream-colored feathers. “These are my princesses,” Tanja said proudly. “Sisi, Maria Theresia, Elisabeth, und Diana.”
    Tanja threw some corn into the pen. The chickens eagerly ran over and pecked daintily at the grain on the ground. “Come,” Tanja said. “We get eggs.”
    I followed her into the henhouse. It was warm and smelled of clean hay. There were little compartments, neatly labeled. In the one labeled “Diana,” on a bed of hay, was a fresh spotted egg.
    “Take egg!” Tanja urged.
    I picked it up. It was warm. It felt safe. Or maybe I wanted to keep it safe. In any case, I cradled it carefully in my palm as I backed slowly out of the tiny house.
    Tanja was holding three more eggs in her apron. They didn’t look like the ones at the store. One was pure white, one tan, one brown, and mine was speckled. “I cook for you,” she said, holding out her hand. Almost reluctantly, I handed over my egg.
    We went to sit at the long wooden tables in the sunlight. After a few minutes, Tanja came back with thick black bread, sliced fresh butter (“From Gerti,” she told us), and an egg. My egg. I could tell because of the spots.[SB256][KL257]
    “I don’t really like eggs,” I told Tanja.
    “You like this one,” she said.
    “You said I wouldn’t have to eat anything,” I said to Sara.
    She shrugged. “You not have to. Your choice.”
    Tanja was watching me expectantly. I picked up a knife. My hands were shaking, but [SB258][KL259]I managed to cut off the top. I made a bit of a mess, getting the yolk on my fingers. The yellow was so deep and bright it was really more of an orange.
    “It’s a weird color!” I said.
    “Diana’s eggs always orange. Taste extra good!”
    Felix passed me the salt and pepper. I picked up a spoon. How had I gotten talked into this? We’d passed a health clinic on the way. It wasn’t far. Maybe two bus stops. If I got sick, I could probably walk.
    I wanted to do this. Didn’t I? Yes. I wanted to show myself how brave I could be. I dipped the spoon in the egg, coating the metal with orange yolk.
    No, I couldn’t. I wasn’t brave after all.
    I was about to put my spoon down when one of the chickens let out a loud call. We all turned and looked. It was Diana. She had walked to the edge of her pen and was looking at me through the wire. She tilted her head, as if to say, Go on, and let out another little coo.
    So quickly, before I could think about it, I popped the spoon into my mouth.
    Think of the lightest, fluffiest scrambled eggs you can imagine, but make them lighter, creamier. It almost didn’t taste like eggs at all, but a salty, rich pudding, warm on my tongue.
    Before I knew it, I was taking another bite. And then another. Finally, I was scraping fully cooked egg whites from the edge of the shell.
    “I did it!” I said.
    Felix high-fived me. Sara smiled. Tanja and Frau Müller went about their business, serving the other customers.
    I sat there, waiting for the stomach pains to begin. Waiting to feel sick. Waiting for my anxiety to come back. I could feel it starting. You did something so foolish! Even if it tasted good, why take the chance?! I started to feel hot, then cold, then hot again. Then a cool,[KL261] wet nose came to snuffle my arm.
    It was a dog. “He wants to play.” Sara laughed.
    I threw the ball for the dog for a while. And I didn’t feel sick.
    I petted the cow again and watched Tanja milk her. And I didn’t feel sick.
    Before we left, Tanja gave me a handful of corn, and I threw it to the chickens. They all came running to me, and this time all I thought was Thank you for the delicious egg.
***
I made Felix and Sara stick close to home the rest of the day. I wanted to be near the phone in case anything went wrong. I felt a little dizzy if I thought too much about what I had done. But I’d taken my temperature three times, and it had remained a steady 98.6 (or 37 degrees, according to Felix’s Celsius thermometer).
    To keep my mind off the rod-shaped bacteria that were possibly at this very moment invading my intestinal track (although probably not—I mean, Diana did seem like a very nice chicken), Sara and I helped Felix decide who to invite to his birthday party. Turned out, he had lost that battle, and his mother had already scheduled it for the following weekend.
    “There’s nobody I like at school!” Felix argued.
    “No one?” Sara asked.
    Felix ignored her and crossed his arms.
    “Maybe you need a list too,” I said.
    Felix glared at me. “I’m not afraid of having a birthday party!”
    Sara and I glanced at each other.
    “I’m not!” Felix protested.
    “Okay,” I said.
    “Just because you’re scared of stupid things like riding a bike or eating an egg doesn’t mean I . . .” He paused, and when I looked over at him, he was blinking frantically, as if a grain of sand had blown into his eye. “They don’t like me.”
    “Why not?” Sara asked. “You very nice.”[SB262][KL263]
    “It’s hard talking to people I don’t know. It’s easier to just read a book.”
    “We all fear different things,” Sara said.
    “I ate the egg,” I pointed out.
    “Fine,” Felix sighed.
    I pulled my Doomsday Journal out of my bag and ripped out a page from the back. I only spent a moment worrying if I had weakened the binding of the book, before I handed the paper to Felix. Sara found a pen and gave it to him.
    Felix wrote swiftly, reading his words aloud: “Nummer eins: Geburtstagsfeier beim Heurigen. I’ll have a party. Satisfied?”
    Sara and I nodded.
    “Now we just need to figure out who to invite,” I said. “Do you have a yearbook or something?”
    There was no yearbook, but he did have a school directory. Sara and I studied tiny black-and-white photos as Felix described his classmates. Rasheed’s father was from India and his mother was Austrian, and according to Felix, he was the least annoying person in chess club.
    “Chess club?” I asked.
    “I only go because Mama said I had to join one club.”
    “Hey,” I said. “I like chess.”
    Daisy was English, a short girl with glasses and a blond ponytail. They’d worked on a science-fair project together once.
    Peter was born in Nigeria but had lived in Austria since he was two. “He doesn’t say much,” Felix said, “but when he does, he’s funny.”
    And then there was Mai. All Felix would say about her was that her family was from China. All I could tell from her picture was her hair was cut into a short black bob. “So you think she’s cute?”
    Felix blushed so fiercely, I knew I was right. “She’s never spoken to me,” he said. “Mama said I had to pick four people. It’s not like any of them are going to come.”
    Still, it had been fun picking them out. I was sort of looking forward to the party. That evening, as I was getting ready for bed, I realized I still didn’t have a fever or cramps or vomiting. I’d done it! I’d eaten a soft-boiled egg. And it felt really good to cross that first item off my list.

