 21
Erdbeerkopf
First thing the next morning, we had to go buy me a bike helmet; I absolutely insisted on it. Even though no one wore them in Austria. Even though we had to take a subway all the way across town to find a bike store.
    Just walking in made me nervous. The first salesman who came up to us had his arm in a sling. “What do you think happened?” I whispered to Felix.
    “He probably fell off his bike,” Felix whispered back.
    I gave Felix a shove.
    “What?” he asked. “You know I’m right.”
    “Just wait till we get to that dance class. All those girls you’ll have to dance[SB309] with.”
    “Yeah,” he said with a grin, “but you have to get there first.”
    Sara did all the talking. There weren’t that many choices. The only helmet that fit me was huge and red.
    “Erdbeerkopf,” I heard the salesman say.
    Sara giggled.
    “What’s Erdbeerkopf?” I asked Felix.
    “Strawberry head.”
    I looked in the mirror. It did look like I had a humongous strawberry on my head. I laughed too. “As long as my head doesn’t get squished like one, Erdbeerkopf is okay with me!”
    When we got home that afternoon, Felix, Sara, and I went to the storage unit where everyone in the community kept their bikes. It was a small room just off the communal laundry. Felix and Sara had their own bikes; Katarina had said I could borrow hers. Felix lowered the seat until I could sit on the bike and keep my toes on the ground. He put air in the tires and oil on the chain.
    “How did you learn to do all that?” I asked.
    He shrugged. “Just did.”
    It seemed pretty impressive to me.
    Felix had to show me how to walk the bike, holding one hand on the handlebars and one hand on the seat to keep it steady. Sara thought I should practice by the local school. There was a blacktop there, but when we went over to take a look, it was already filled with little kids on bikes, riding around in circles. Kids who were much younger than me.
    “No,” I said. “It would be way too embarrassing to practice here.”
    Sara bit her lip. “I have an idea.”
    She led us away from the main road, toward the vineyards, back to the path where Katarina had made me go walking on my very first morning in Austria. The uphill slope was slight, but now that I was pushing this death machine of metal and rubber, I felt every step.
    “Good spot,” Sara said finally. “Soft dirt if you fall off. No one to watch.”
    Doubtfully, I positioned the bike in the middle of the path and sat down on the seat. They were both full of advice.
    “Walk the bike first, using the breaks if you want to stop,” Felix suggested.
    “Look ahead, not at your feet,” Sara instructed.
    “Coast down a gentle slope.”
    “Walk, and then pick up your feet.”
    I tried. Walking was okay, if a little awkward. But when I lifted up my feet and tried to coast, I panicked. The bike wobbled, and I overcorrected and promptly crashed into a grapevine. Unripe grapes fell onto my forehead. I felt like an idiot. And my elbow hurt. I’d probably broken it. Can you bend your arm if it’s broken?
    “Get up,” Sara said.
    “Try again,” Felix urged. “Start with the pedals in the two o’clock position.”
    “Push down with right foot.”
    “Find your balance.”
    “Use breaks.”
    “Don’t forget to steer!”
    I tried to listen—I really did! But my heart was beating so loudly, it was hard to hear them. Again, I ended up in the soft dirt.
    The next time it was harder to get back on the bike. To swing my leg over, grip the handlebars. Every time I coasted forward, I thought, When am I going to fall? And instead of balancing, I’d drag my feet to stop the bike.
    Finally, I’d had enough. Felix rode the bike home; Sara and I walked slowly back to the house. “We try again,” she said.
    “No.”
    “We try again,” she insisted. “You get it all at once.”
    I did not believe her.
    On top of everything else, I was covered in dirt. I decided to take a bath before Dad got home. The hot water felt good on my sore bones, except I didn’t like seeing the bruises springing up on my arms and legs, big purples blotches on my pale skin. Bruises were a sign of internal bleeding, which I had detailed notes on in Doomsday Journal #3, page 27. Bleeding was bad. I hated bleeding. Just the idea of blood made me feel light-headed.
    I quickly got out of the bath and put on jeans and a long-sleeve shirt so I wouldn’t have to look at my bruises. I still had half an hour before my father got home. My thoughts were spinning. Deciding to ride a bike was a terrible idea. I was going to get really badly hurt. I mean, look at the bike salesman. He’d broken his arm, and he was a professional!
    The phone rang and I jumped. I’d never been so happy to hear my mom’s voice.
    “I’m in Venice,” she told me. “I went to the glass factory in Murano this morning and bought these beautiful red wineglasses. I’m going to a concert tonight, but I wanted to give you a quick call before I left. How are you, Becca?”
    I told her about the bike and the dance lessons, and I even explained about the list. Mom listened without interrupting.
    “I’m just going to forget about the whole thing,” I said. “The list thing was probably stupid. I mean, better safe than sorry, right?”
    Mom was quiet.
    “Mom, did you hear what I said?” I asked. “Katarina wants me to go bike riding. On the street! How dangerous is that?!”
    “I don’t know,” Mom said. “Wouldn’t it be nice to ride a bike?”
    “Yes, but . . .”
    “And your father agreed that it was safe.”
    “Dad doesn’t really think I can do it.”
    Mom tsked. “Becca, I don’t think that’s true. Of course your father believes in you!”
    I didn’t say anything.
    “I need to go now,” Mom said. “I’m having dinner with a new friend I met on the train before the concert. But, Becca?”
    “What?”
    “I have confidence in confidence alone!” Mom sang.
    I groaned. The Sound of Music was not going to help. “Bye, Mom. I love you.”
    “Bye, sweetie. Love you too.”
    Once she hung up, I went back to my room and looked at my list:
    1.	Eat a soft-boiled egg.
    2.	Learn to ride a bike.
    3.	Hang out in a large crowd.
    4.	Go on the Riesenrad.
    5.	Travel somewhere by myself.
    The egg hadn’t been so bad. But the rest? I was afraid they were impossible.

