 22
The Man from Barcelona
Sara wanted me to try bike riding again the next morning, but I refused. My bruises were too fresh—I needed a day to recover. At least that’s what I said. The truth was I needed the rest of the year to recover. Every time I thought about getting on that bike again, I felt nauseous and jittery.
    We hung around the house in the morning. After lunch, my father called to say he would be home late, then Katarina called to say she would also be working late.
    Felix and I were watching TV on his couch when Sara said, “I have idea.”
    “What?” I asked.
    “Surprise,” she said. “Put on a dress.”
    “Dress?” Felix teased.
    “Du—eine lange Hose,” she instructed him.
    “A long hose?” I asked. “Are you going to fight a fire?”
    “It means pants,” Felix said.
    As much as we nudged her, Sara wouldn’t tell us her plan. I went back to my dad’s house to change. I’m not really a dress person, but Mom had made me pack one—a Laura Ashley blue floral-print dress with a sweetheart neck, a full skirt, and little cap sleeves. I thought it made me look like I was an extra on Little House on the Prairie, but Mom thought it was cute.
    “Okay,” I called, letting myself back into Katarina’s house. “I’m ready.”
    Sara had changed into a high-necked party dress. It was black, white, and hot pink, with rhinestones along the neckline, and a puffy tulle skirt. “Cool dress!”
    Sara blushed. “I bought for senior dance in Sarajevo. I not get to go. Not practical thing to pack, but—”
    “I love it.”
    Felix came down next. He had on khaki pants and a red polo shirt. He’d even brushed his hair.[JL311][KL312]
    “You look nice,” I said.
    He grunted. “So where are we going?”
    “I tell you on the way.”
    Sara ushered us out the door and onto the bus. Once we were settled in our seats, we turned to look at her. “I have a very exciting plan,” she said, pausing dramatically. “Tonight, we see . . . José Carreras!”
    Um. Yeah. Okay. I had no idea who that was. I glanced at Felix. He shrugged.
    “Who’s that?” I asked.
    “José Carreras!” Sara exclaimed, even more emphatically. “The famous tenor. From Barcelona.”
    “Never heard of him,” I said.
    Sara looked like she was going to freak out.
    “Wait,” Felix said slowly. “Is he one of those Three Tenors dudes? The guys who sang at the World Cup?”
    “Yes!” Sara grinned triumphantly.
    “Cool!” Felix exclaimed. “We’re going to a football game!”
    “Soccer?” I asked.
    “No,” Sara sighed, exasperated. “We go to opera.”
    “Opera?” I asked.
    “Yes.” Sara seemed thrilled just thinking about it. “We see the opening night of La Traviata. My favorite. José Carreras sings Alfredo.”
    Felix crossed his arms. “You tricked us. I could have just stayed home.”
    “Alone? No.”
    “I’m thirteen!” he argued.
    “Good for you to go.”
    “What’s it about?” I asked. I mean, I’d only listened to it once, but Sara seemed pretty excited about it.
    “Well,” Sara started, “La Traviata tells the story of a Parisian courtesan, Violetta. She has a party. Alfredo, handsome young man, declares love, but she says no. Must be free!”
    “Free to do what?” Felix asked.
    Sara ignored him. “A few months later, Violetta is in love with Alfredo. They move to the country. Very happy, until Alfredo’s father tells Violetta she must leave his son.”
    “Why?” I asked.
    “Violetta has a bad reputation.”
    “That doesn’t make sense,” Felix said.
    “No. It is an opera,” Sara said, as if that explained everything.
    “So do Alfredo and Violetta break up?” I asked.
    “Yes. Then get back together. Then she dies of tuberculosis!”
    Felix rolled his eyes.
    “Death sad,” Sara admitted. “But music—beautiful and romantic!”
    “Hmm.” The plot sounded a bit like the time on Love on the Evening Tide when Georgio met a cocktail waitress and brought her home to his family. He’d wanted to marry her, but his family threatened to disown him and give his portion of the casino on the family steamboat to his third cousin. So he’d broken up with her. But then she’d come down with cancer, and he’d rushed to her side and . . . Okay, it sounded exactly like Love on the Evening Tide. (I hoped Grandma was remembering to tape it.) “I’ll give it a chance,” I said cautiously.
    “Thank you, Becca,” Sara said.
    We got off the bus and onto the streetcar and were almost to Schottentor before I realized I had forgotten to ask the most important question of all. “Wait—where is this opera?”
    “At the opera house,” said Sara.
    “That’s like a theater, right?”
    “Yes.”
    No. No, no, no. “I don’t like crowds,” I said, my voice wavering. Doesn’t she remember? It’s number three on my list!
    “I know. It number three on your list.”
    Okay, so she did remember. “I’m not ready to do this tonight,” I said, beginning to sweat. Occasionally, I could go to the movies, like on weekday afternoons when it was mainly empty. But never on opening night. You could get trampled. Or robbed. Or what if someone yelled, Fire? There’d been a whole Supreme Court case about that (DJ #2, p. 17, Schenck v. United States, 1919).
    “You are,” Sara said. “You need to build confidence. Then you ride bike.”
    “You tricked me!” I complained.
    “She tricked both of us,” Felix grumbled.
    Sara nodded. “I very tricky.”[SB315]
    “You’re sly. Deceptive. Devious. Sneaky!” Felix went on.
    Sara nodded again. “English has many good words.”
    My heart was pounding by the time I followed Sara and Felix onto Straßenbahn 1[JL316][KL317]. I’d gone to the symphony at the Kennedy Center once, on a field trip in fourth grade. I’d ended up spending most of the visit in the bathroom, throwing up. My teacher had not been pleased.
    “No,” I said. “I don’t want to go.”
    “It’s on your list,” Felix pointed out.
    Okay, so I did want to go. But not now. Sometime . . . later. In the future. When I didn’t feel so scared. “I’m too afraid when I can’t easily leave a place. Like in a theater.”
    Sara looked at me kindly then, her lock of green hair sparkling in the late-afternoon sun. “Rebecca,” she said slowly, breaking my name down into its full three syllables. “You were afraid to eat egg.”
    “I did that,” I admitted.
    “Felix was afraid to have a party,” she continued.
    “He did that,” I said.
    “Feeling afraid is part of being brave.”
    “No, it’s not,” I said.
    “Yes,” Sara said. “Most important part.”
    It was time to get off the streetcar then. The opera house didn’t look pretty to me anymore. It looked like a big, squat jail.
    “You have choice,” Sara said. “You get back on Straßenbahn, go home alone. Or you go to opera.”
    “I don’t like those choices.”
    Sara shrugged. “Choosing is part of being brave too.”
    She waited for me to make my decision. I said nothing. I couldn’t choose. I did want to be brave. I wanted my father to buy me tickets to the latest musical. And do you think I enjoyed always waiting for a movie to come out on video? Heck, I even kind of wanted to see the opera. But I didn’t want to die! And being trapped in a room full of strangers in the dark, well, it sounded like a nightmare. My thoughts went around and around in a loop, like that ancient Greek snake that eats its own tail. I was scared of snakes too and—
    “Can I go home?” Felix asked.
    “No,” Sara said.
    “Why not?” Felix asked.
    A snake eating its own tail made a big circle, and that made me think about the Riesenrad and how awful I’d felt when I hadn’t gone on the ride. What made me think the opera would be any different?
    Except . . . I had eaten that egg.
    “Felix, please stay,” I said, “because I want to see the opera. And if I’m going to sit there with all those hundreds of strange people, I’d like to have a friend on both sides.”
    “Fine,” Felix said. “You can sit in the middle.”
    And just like that, the snake gobbled up the last bit of itself and disappeared.

