 24
The Opera
We trekked all the way down the stairs and back toward the subway. I sat on a bench while Sara and Felix went to one of the food stands lining the Ringstraße and came back with three plates. Each one had a round roll, a long sausage that looked like a skinny hot dog, and a big [JL330][KL331]dollop of mustard. The mustard was much spicier than I was used to, but it tasted good. I watched how Felix tore off chunks of the bread and combined all three ingredients.
    “I’ve never actually been to the opera,” Felix mused, his mouth full of mustard and sausage. “Does the Staatsoper have supertitles?”
    “You mean subtitles,” I said.
    “No,” Felix said. “Subtitles are at the bottom of the screen, like in a movie. Supertitles are projected onto a little screen above the stage.”
    Sara shook her head. “No. But I told you the plot. You will feel the music.”
    I was a little doubtful about that. “How did you learn all this?” I asked. “Where to go and what to do?”
    Sara blushed. “I love music. First time I went to the opera, I did everything wrong! Stood in wrong spot. Man yelled at me. I not know to bring scarf. But a nice lady saw me, and she had an extra ticket. She gave it to me. I got a seat! Listened to beautiful music. In country that makes opera so cheap, everyone can go. And it made me feel like maybe everything would be okay.”
    When we were done eating, we went back to the opera, walking in the front doors this time. The main entrance looked more like a concert hall and less like the corridor behind the [JL332][KL333]school gym. There was a massive marble staircase with a red runner. We spent a while admiring the paintings and gilded statues, the clothes on the other people, the ornate gold[JL335][KL336] chandeliers. We took the marble staircase this time, walking slowly up the carpet, which was so plush, my sandals seemed to sink into it. It didn’t feel quite real—had I paid $1.50 and suddenly been transported to a castle? I kept waiting for the anxious feeling to return, but there were so many new and interesting things to look at.
    We finally made it back to the top floor. I saw an usher handing out programs and went to get one, but when I held out my hand, she said something to me I didn’t understand.[JL337][KL338]
    “You have to pay for the program,” Felix translated.
    “Oh,” I said. “Can I buy one?”
    Sara rummaged in her purse and handed over a few coins.
    “How much did it cost?” I asked.
    “Twenty-five schillings,” Felix said.
    “The program costs more than the ticket?!”
    Sara laughed. “Yes. That is odd!”
    The program was nice, though. It was really almost a thin book instead of a program. There was even a page that had a summary of the plot in English. I read it quickly. We found our spots on the railing, and I breathed a sigh of relief that my scarf was still there.
    The theater was filling up now. I scanned the rows, looking for empty seats, places to run and hide. There were none. “Is it sold out?” I asked.
    “Yes,” Sara said.
    My heart started to beat faster again. I looked down. We were so high, it made me dizzy. No, not again! My hands started to sweat, and I wiped them on my new blue [JL339][KL340][KL342]scarf, leaving stains.
    Suddenly, the lights went down. A hush washed over the theater. I was going to faint. I was going to throw up. I was about to run out.
    And then the music started.
    The music was gentle, shimmering at first. I shivered. I couldn’t see the orchestra, but I could hear it, as if the music were just appearing out of the darkness. Then a waltz started—one, two, three, one, two, three—slow and sweet and longing.
    The curtain rose on a party scene. The stage was filled with people in ball gowns. Who cared about exit rows and possible stampedes when there was a ball to watch!
    A man with dark hair walked onto the stage, and the audience roared, cheering and applauding, even though he hadn’t opened his mouth yet. I figured it must be the José guy. He didn’t have a microphone, and yet when he did start to sing, I could literally feel my head vibrating. I’d never heard anything like it—pure, clear, unamplified music that sounded as up close and personal as if I were wearing headphones. It was like a plug was pulled on my fears, draining them all away with the music.
    I couldn’t understand exactly what was going on most of the time, despite Sara’s description and the summary in the program, but it didn’t really matter. I understood what the characters were feeling. And I loved it. When the curtain came down and the lights came up, I was disappointed it was over, until I realized this must be intermission. Alfredo and Violetta hadn’t gotten back together. And no one had died.
    Sara led us to a mirror-lined salon filled with couches to sit on and a counter where a waitress was selling champagne and chocolate-covered strawberries. Sara bought us each a small bottle of sparkling water. Next, we picked up a Plakat—this was a poster, printed on thin newspaper, advertising that night’s opera, complete with the times and the cast. The saleslady wrapped a rubber band around it as she handed it to me. The water and the poster each cost more than my ticket.
    I started to feel nervous again in the crowded hall. It was hot. Without music, my throat felt dry, even though I’d just drunk all that water. Sara glanced over at me, and I must have looked a little green or something, because she took my hand and led Felix and me up another set of stairs. We went out a door, and suddenly we were on a rooftop balcony.
    I immediately felt better. There were only a few people on the roof, and the air was cooler too. I let out a great sigh. The green copper statues of horses rearing were now at eye level, with the stores of Kärntner Straße visible below.
    “What do you think?” Sara asked. “Of opera?”
    “Well,” Felix said sheepishly. “I have to admit, it’s not half bad.”
    “I love it,” I gushed. “I thought the José guy would be lame, but when he sings, it feels like that ‘Crisscross Applesauce’ game kids play to give each other goose bumps. It gives me shivers!”
    Sara smiled. “I so happy!” We stared at the lights below, twinkling in the summer evening. I took deep breaths of the cool air until it was time to go back to our seats. I mean, our non-seats. I just had the slightest brush of nerves this time as I walked into the enormous hall. It felt like instead of careening around in my stomach, the butterflies were fluttering around me, caressing my cheeks. My feet were starting to feel a little sore, but as the lights went down again, I forgot all about them, and the butterflies were chased off by the music. I leaned on the railing, closing my eyes sometimes when the music was just too pretty to bear any other way.
    Okay, so maybe I cried a little at the end too.
    I looked over at Sara as the lights came up. She was dabbing at her eyes with her purple scarf. I did the same with my blue one. The audience cheered and stomped their feet and yelled “Bravo” as the singers took their bows, and even Felix joined in. People threw flowers. Mr. Carreras gathered a few of them up and presented them to the soprano singing with him. The crowd screamed even louder. This went on for a good ten minutes. Every time I thought the audience was done, José came out to take another bow, and it started all over again.
    Sara grinned. It made me happy to see her looking so happy.
    When the singers were finally done, I carefully collected my program, my poster, and my ticket. As we walked down the plush stairs, I could see the crystals in the chandelier shift a little, almost as if someone were still singing, as if a high note from an aria were making the glass vibrate.
    We came out of the big doors onto Kärntner Straße. It seemed like a different, magical place in the darkness, all lit up. People walked toward the Straßenbahn stop, humming to themselves. I was part of something; we had all had the same amazing experience together. The rattle of the streetcars was the percussion; the murmurs of the people were the violins. And for the first time, I understood what Sara meant when she told me to[SB343] listen to the universe[JL344][KL345].

