 25
The Letter
The magical mood lasted until we got home. The door opened before I could even pull out my key. “Finally!” Dad called out. He sounded worried.
    “I left a note,” Sara said, glancing at her watch. “We back right on time.”
    “No, no,” Dad said, ushering us all inside. “It’s just . . .”
    Katarina stood up from where she’d been sitting on the couch. She was clutching something small and rectangular in her hands. “Sara, you got a letter!”
    “Einen Brief?” Felix asked in German.
    Katarina nodded. She handed the letter to Sara. It was bent and wrinkled, as if someone had crumpled it up and flattened it out again. Small cursive letters formed Sara’s name. “From Bosnia. But not Mama’s handwriting.”
    “Hester and her team found some bags of mail that had never been delivered in a bombed-out post office. They sent them to the newspaper. We were going to try to get them to the right people, maybe write a story about the missing letters. An assistant sorting through them noticed this one was addressed[JL346][KL347] to my office. Where you used to work as a housekeeper. She thought it was odd and brought it to me.”
    “I sent Mama that address when I first arrived,” Sara said. “That was months ago. She not get my other letters?”
    “I don’t know,” Katarina said simply.
    Sara started to shake. “Why she not write herself? Did something happen?”
    “I don’t know,” Katarina repeated. “Do you want us to leave you alone while you open the letter?”
    Sara shook her head. “No. Please stay.”
    She ripped open the letter. A single piece of paper fell to the floor. Trembling, she bent over and picked it up. The rest of us—Dad, me, Felix, and Katarina—stood in a hushed circle around her as she read.
    Sara started to cry.
    “Is it . . . bad news?” I asked.
    “No, it’s from Mama. She asked a neighbor to post the letter.”
    “Oh, thank goodness,” said Katarina.
    Sara read the rest of the letter quickly and silently. When she was done, she sat down slowly on the couch.[SB348][KL349] The tulle of her skirt flipped up; the hot pink, so flattering before, washed out her face now. The rhinestones twinkled annoyingly. “May I have a cup of tea?” Sara asked.
    I ran to get the water.
    A few minutes later, we were all gathered around the couch, mugs of tea in our hands, listening intently as Sara paraphrased the letter.
    “Mama says since Jewish humanitarian society stopped their evacuations, she paid a woman to help them sneak across the no-man’s-land of the Sarajevo airport.”
    “What?!” Dad exclaimed. “There was a report on the news about that last week. If they get picked up by the United Nations peacekeeper forces, they’ll simply be brought back to Sarajevo. However, if the Serb forces find them—”
    “Dad,” I interrupted. “This isn’t a news report. It’s Sara’s family.” She didn’t need to be reminded that they could be raped or tortured or killed. We’d all watched that news report together.
    “I’m sorry,” Dad said. “Keep reading.”
    Sara took another sip of her tea and continued, “Mama says she knows it’s dangerous, but things are worse. There’s no electricity, little food, and they moved in with a neighbor because our apartment was damaged by shelling. This is a way to literally walk out of war zone. If it works, if she and Eldin make it to the Bosnian-held territory on the other side of airport, they’ll go to the village Butmir, where they can take a bus to Croatia. Just like I did. From there, they hope to find a way to Austria.”
    “That’s good news,” Katarina said. “You know they’re alive and they are coming here.”
    I took Sara’s hand and squeezed it.
    “Mama left a phone number. A friend of a friend in Croatia.”
    “Call!” Katarina insisted. “Now.”
    Sara walked over to the big red phone on the kitchen countertop. We all stayed on the couch and pretended we weren’t watching her. Sara carefully laid the letter on the counter and dialed, slow and deliberate. She turned away so we couldn’t see her face as the phone began to ring. I watched her fingers play with a bit of netting from her skirt, bunching it into a ball and then smoothing it out again.
    The phone rang. And rang. And rang.[SB350]
    “No one . . . Ah, halo[JL351][KL352]!”
    We all gasped as Sara started speaking quickly in a language none of us understood. She spoke for a minute or two. I realized I was holding my breath and forced myself to breathe in and out. Will she get to talk to her mother? Did she find them?
    Suddenly, she hung up the phone. She still had her back to us, and her shoulders started to shake. “They not there,” she managed finally. I couldn’t hear her cry, but when she turned to face us, her mascara was running down her face. “She expected them three weeks ago. But they never showed up.”
    “Oh, Schatzi,” Katarina sighed.
    I ran to give Sara a hug.
    “Where could they be?” Sara wailed. “What happened?!”
    “There was probably just a problem finding a bus,” I said. “Or maybe they decided to come directly to Austria?”
    “Maybe.” Sara clung to me tighter as she cried. “Eldin is only six. His best friend was a little Serbian boy. He had curly brown hair. And then they . . . they wouldn’t let him come over anymore. They wouldn’t hurt him, would they?”
    I looked to Dad or Katarina to say something to fix this, to make the situation better. But they just stood there, frozen. I realized they didn’t know what to say either. There was no answer I could write down in my Doomsday Journal. My head spun, as if I were back in line at the opera, except this time, Sara wasn’t looking calmly on. This time, I had to be the calm one.
    “Sit down,” I told Sara, leading her back to the couch. She followed me like a lost puppy. I picked up her mug; it was cold. “Could someone get her some fresh tea?”
    Everyone sprang into motion then: Felix ran to refill the cup, Katarina draped a blanket over Sara’s shoulders, Dad picked up the envelope and studied the postmark. We didn’t really do or say anything; we just sat there. It felt weird. And uncomfortable. But eventually, Sara stopped crying, and she and Felix and Katarina walked home.
    Dad hugged me as soon as they left. “I’m so grateful that you are here and not . . .”
    He didn’t finish his sentence, but I knew what he meant. “Me too.”
    “I’m exhausted now, but I have one question before you go to bed. Did you really go to the opera?”
    I nodded.
    “With all those people?”
    “Yeah.”
    “And you stayed the whole time? Without getting upset?”
    “I was nervous at first,” I admitted. “And I did freak out when we were waiting in line. But Sara was super patient, and I just sat there and eventually the fear went away. Like Dr. Teresa said it would. And the opera!” I grinned, remembering. “It was so great, Dad! It felt really different, listening to the music with other people there. It was like we were all doing something together!”
    “Becca, I am so proud of you.” Dad smiled, but then he looked sad.
    “What’s wrong?” I asked.
    “Do you remember last year, when you wanted to go see Les Mis for your birthday?”
    “Yeah.”
    “I vetoed the idea, because I was worried that you might get nervous. Well, I think I might have made a mistake.” He gave me a bear hug, and for a moment, I felt like the bravest person in the world.
[JL354][KL355]    I went to bed then, but I couldn’t sleep. I’d never felt such a mix of emotions—I was happy about the opera and sad Sara didn’t know where her family was. My dad was proud of me! And yet I still squirmed with disappointment that my anxiety had prevented me from doing so many things in the past.
    Finally, I gave up on sleeping and picked up my Doomsday Journal. I got a pen and drew a thick line through item #3 on my list.
    1.	Eat a soft-boiled egg.
    2.	Learn to ride a bike.
    3.	Hang out in a large crowd.
    4.	Go on the Riesenrad.
    5.	Travel somewhere by myself.
    Two! I’d crossed two things off my list now. But now there were only a few days left before the dance class. After how proud Dad had looked tonight, I didn’t want to disappoint him. And Sara. I had to do something to distract her from worrying about her family. But just thinking about getting on that bike again made me nervous. If only I could recreate how I’d felt tonight—connected to everyone and everything. If I could feel like that, I was sure I could do it.
    Then I had an idea. A good one. I turned to a blank page and began to write.

