 26
“Do-Re-Mi” Ride
The next morning as I was getting dressed, I caught sight of the bruises on my thigh. They were dark-violet now—truly purple. I didn’t get many bruises. I didn’t take many chances. I never remembered having so many bruises before. As if an invisible force were poking them, they started to ache. What if I have internal bleeding?! What if . . .
    No. I forced myself to pull on some jeans and went to get some oatmeal.
    After breakfast, Felix, Sara, and I rolled my bike up the little hill. Sara was maybe a little quieter than usual, but she seemed okay. It was a beautiful summer day. The sunshine was yellow but not too hot; the sky blue and clear; the grapevines green and winding; my helmet as red as a wild strawberry. It felt a bit like I was Dorothy, walking into a technicolor world. I was nervous, but I forced myself to take a deep breath. The strap on my helmet cut into my chin, so I loosened it, then tightened it again. I swung my leg over the bike and sat down on the seat. And then in my head, I imagined José Carreras starting to sing:
Do, the bike, it stays upright.
Re, the pedal two o’clock.
    I put the pedal in the two o’clock position, and before I could think about it too much, I pushed down with my right foot. My hands were shaking on the handlebars. I know Felix noticed, but he didn’t say anything. Sara held the seat as she ran along beside me.
Mi, push off, you’re balancing.
Fa, just ride, don’t try to talk.
    The grapevines were whipping past me. I wobbled once, and then it suddenly felt easier. As if the bike were part of me, and I could control it. Like I controlled my arms and legs.
So, you’re rolling down the hill.
La, it’s really quite a thrill.
Ti . . .
    I realized Sara was no longer holding on, and immediately, I lost control of the bike and crashed into a grapevine. I was sure a bruise was forming on my bruise, probably as purple as the grapes. But for once I didn’t care. Because I’d done it. I knew I had. Just for a second. But still. And what I kept hearing in my head was this:
Ti, get up and try again.
That will bring us back to do-oh-oh-oh[JL356][KL357].
Do, the bike, it stays upright.
    As if following orders, I jumped up and put the bike back on the path.
Re, the pedal two o’clock.
Mi, push off, you’re balancing.
    And then it happened again. The motion. The movement. The lyrics in my head. It felt as if I were flying. It must be a fluke, I thought. Beginner’s luck.
Fa, just ride, don’t try to talk.
So, you’re rolling down the hill.
La, it’s really quite a thrill.
    The words and motions flowed together as I rode far into the vineyard. I could hear everything: the wind in the grapevines, the squeak of the back wheel, a bird calling overhead, the squish of mud as I rolled through a puddle.
    When I stopped, there was no one around. I was alone. In the hills somewhere in the outskirts of Vienna. All by myself. But I didn’t feel alone. It was quiet and the sky was blue, and I felt happy as I listened to the heartbeat of the universe.
    Finally, I started pedaling again, heading back to Felix and Sara. I sang out loud this time. Maybe I wobbled a bit, and sure, my voice shook, but [KL359]I kept riding. My parents would be so proud of me. I was so proud of me! When I got home, I could ride to the pool with Chrissy. Mom and I could go on a bike ride along the river. I could ride with Felix to dance class! On the street. On the hard street. With no soft grapevines to crash into. All at once, my fears rushed back and I fell off the bike.
    No, I told myself sternly as I picked myself up from the dirt. That was a worry for another day. Today, all I had to worry about was singing[JL360][KL361] my song.
    Felix and Sara didn’t even wait until I’d fully stopped before running over to me.
    “You did it!” Felix said.
    “You see?” said Sara. “Very brave.”
    “Thank you,” I whispered to both of them. “You gave me the idea.”
    “What?” Sara looked puzzled.
    “With the music last night,” I said. “Today, I sang a song as I rode.”
    “Opera?” Felix asked.
    “No.” I laughed. “But I did imagine José Carreras singing it. I just made up words to an old song.”
    “What song?” Sara asked.
    “Do-Re-Mi.”
    I got a blank look from both of them.
    “From The Sound of Music.”
    “Never seen it,” said Felix.
    Sara shook her head.
    “What?!” I exclaimed. “Neither of you has ever seen The Sound of Music?”
    “No,” said Sara.
    “I’ve heard of it,” Felix said defensively. “But it’s kind of a cliché in Austria. No one actually walks around wearing dirndls.”
    “Except Frau Gamperl,” added Sara[JL363][KL364]. “And the waitresses at the Gasthof. And—"
    “Okay, so almost nobody wears a dirndl,” Felix amended.
    We flopped down in the grass on the edge of the vineyard. Sara passed out bars of Kinder Schokolade, or chocolate for kids. (Katarina insisted that they were healthy because they contained milk. I hated to tell her all milk chocolate contained milk.) Felix handed out bottles of Almdudler. That was an Austrian soda; it tasted a lot like ginger ale.[SB366][KL367]
    “Thank you,” I whispered to both of them again. There was more I wanted to say, but that was all that came out. We lay there a long time, gazing at the sky, our shoulders touching in the grass. Listening.
***
That evening, as soon as he got home from work, I asked Dad to come down to the blacktop with me. There were still a couple of five- and six-year-olds zipping around on their bikes, but I ignored them. I fastened my helmet, put my foot on my pedal, sang my little song[JL368][KL369] (in my head this time), and pushed off.
    I only wobbled once. And Dad grinned the rest of the evening.

