 27
The Pig Journal
The next morning, Sara, Felix, and I were planning to ride all the way to the dance studio, just so I could get a feel for the route before class on Friday. However, when we woke up, it was raining[JL370][KL371]. Like, really pouring. I mean, Austrians don’t usually let a little rain stop them, but it was raining cats and dogs, and I’m pretty sure there were a couple of cows and chickens in there too.
    “Sorry,” Sara told me.
    “You’ll be fine,” Felix reassured me. “There’s a bike path the whole day.”
    I knew there was a path. I’d made him sketch me out a little map. But the last two blocks were on the street. What if a car makes an unexpected turn? What if a bus stops suddenly? What if a truck swerves into the bike path? Still, there was nothing we could do. I couldn’t practice in a thunderstorm—we might get hit by lightning! (DJ #2, p. 12.)
    Then that afternoon, Sara got a phone call from Marco. He asked her to [JL372][KL373]come in early on Friday to participate in a more advanced group. Sara refused at first, not wanting to leave Felix and me to make the bike ride alone. But I kept thinking about her list, how she wanted to perform ballroom dancing, and finally told her she should call him back. Felix and I could do the bike ride alone.
    She asked our parents if it was okay with them. “Of course,” said Katarina. “Felix rides his bike to school every day alone!” I was worried about Dad, but he simply asked me, “Do you feel okay with that plan?”
    I nodded.
    “Then it’s all right with me.”
    For once, Dad believed in me! So I couldn’t back out now. But on Friday morning I found myself regretting my offer. Why hadn’t we all gone early with Sara? Felix and I could have just sat there and read a book while she and Marco practiced. But she was already gone, so it was too late. I slowly packed my backpack: map, bottle of water, first aid kit. I was as ready as I was ever going to be.
    There was a knock at the door. It was Felix, looking like his best friend had died. And he was two hours early.
    “What’s wrong?” I asked.
    “I can’t go to dance class today.”
    “What are you talking about? You have to go. It was Mai’s present.”
    “Don’t care.”
    “But it’s on your list!”
    “Nope. I’m taking it off.”
    “Why?” I asked.
    “I feel like I’m going to throw up.”
    “You’re not going to throw up.” I paused. “Okay, so I have thrown up from nerves before. But you’re probably not going to throw up.”
    “You’re not helping!”
    I wanted to help. “Which part are you worried about?”
    “All of it!”
    “The bike ride?”
    “No. But the rest of it. Having to dance with girls from my class.”
    “But you like Daisy and Mai,” I pointed out.
    “That makes it worse!”
    I studied Felix. I knew that feeling. Like you were out of control. Like you absolutely could not handle what was going on. I couldn’t just abandon Felix to his anxiety. He’d helped me with the bike. He’d stood next to me at the opera. I had to do something to help him.
    “I’m terrible at social things,” Felix went on. “And what is more social than dancing?”
    Then I had an idea.
    We took the bus a few stops and got off when we reached Aïda. “I’m jittery enough,” Felix said. “I don’t need any coffee.”
    I ignored him and led him into the paper store next door. I’d remembered it from our first visit to the coffee shop. The shelves were filled with all kinds of items—wrapping paper, drawing paper, newspaper, computer paper, tissue paper, greeting cards, and journals. Lots and lots of journals. “Pick out a journal,” I told Felix.
    “Why?”
    “Just do it,” I said. “I’ll explain when we get home.”
    We searched the aisles. There were flowered journals. And plain leather ones. There were diaries with pictures of puppies and cats and with geometric designs. Felix finally chose one with a pattern on the front: black and brown and gray and tan.
    “Are those . . . bugs?” I asked.
    “Yup.”
    “Why?”
    “Remember the goulash?” he said.
    “How could I forget?”
    “That was a fun evening.”
    “Yeah,” I agreed. “It was.”
    We went to the counter and got in line to pay. There was another display of journals right by the register—Vienna landmarks. Those diaries were obviously meant for tourists, but on the front of one of them was a beautiful sketch of the Riesenrad. At the last minute, I put it on top of the bug journal and bought it too.
    Truthfully, I was a little surprised at myself. I mean, I still had plenty of pages left in Doomsday Journal #4. But for some reason, I knew I had to buy it.
    When we got home, I told Felix to wait in my living room while I went to my room to get something. A few minutes later, I came back downstairs carrying all four of my journals: the map one, the one with polka dots, the rainbow one, and even the hot-pink one with the unicorn[JL374][KL375].
    “What are those?” Felix asked.
    “These,” I said dramatically, plopping them down onto our coffee table, “are my Doomsday Journals.”
    He tried not to roll his eyes, but I knew him well enough by then to know what he was doing. It was totally an eye roll, even if he tried to pass it off as a blink. “And what in the world is a Doomsday Journal?”
    “It’s one way I cope with my fears,” I said. “I write down all the bad things that might happen. Disasters. Catastrophes. The worst-case scenarios.”
    “And that helps?”
    “I know it sounds crazy. But it does help. Because I also write down all the ways I could cope if the worst really did happen.”
    “It sounds stupid,” Felix said.
    “Hey,” I said. “I’ve [KL378]shown only a few people in the entire world these journals. Show a little respect.”
    “Sorry,” he grumbled.
“Listen . . . This is what I wrote my first day in Austria.” I flipped through the pages of Doomsday Journal #4 and read an entry aloud:[JL379][KL380] “    They are trying to make me eat raw eggs. What if I get salmonella?! High fever. Vomiting. Okay, so what if that happened? Dad would take me to the hospital. I’d get antibiotics. And maybe an IV (I hate needles—see DJ #1, p. 10).”
    “Wow,” Felix said.
    “Yeah, I know,” I said. “But look how much better I am now. I ate a soft-boiled egg!”
    Felix gave me a look.
    “And I hung out in a crowd.” I flipped frantically through the pages again. “Here it is: ‘How to Cope with a Stampede. Number one: Be sure to protect your head. A broken arm or leg can be fixed. A broken skull is much more difficult to repair.’”
    “You are strange.”
    “And bike safety is in here too.” I flipped some more and read, “Always be sure to wear a helmet and use hand signals. Most accidents occur when—[JL381][KL382]”
    “Fine, fine,” he said. “I get it. Just . . . stop reading.”
    I held out the bug journal to him.
    He took it. “So what do I have to do?”
    “Go to your room and write down everything you’re afraid might happen at dance class. And then once you have everything down, come up with at least one way to cope with each one.”
    Felix looked doubtful, but he took the journal.
    Once he left, I took [SB383]everything back up to my room. The thing was, even though I acted as if I were fine, I was nervous too. Not about the dance class—but about the bike ride to get there. I sat down at my desk and opened Doomsday Journal #4.
    What if I fall off my bike? I wrote. What if I get hit by a car? What if I get run over by a Straßenbahn? I might break my arm. I might break my leg. I might end up a vegetable in the hospital. What if someone sees my bike helmet and calls me Strawberry Head?
    I still felt a little off. Something wasn’t quite right.
    The red of the Riesenrad journal caught my eye, and a new idea flashed into my mind. What if I start another journal? A different kind.[JL384][KL385] One where I list everything that goes right.
    I thought about that for a moment. What if I pay a little more attention to the good stuff? All the fun things. I mean, not all the time. But just a little bit. What if I had a place to write down some of my successes?
    My hand was shaking as I picked up a pen. I wasn’t sure what to call this idea, so I just started doodling on the first page. I drew a big circle, and then I added some lines that turned into ears and feet and, finally, a little curly tail. It was a pig! I didn’t know I could draw such a cute little pig.[JL386][KL387] I remembered that having pig in German meant having good luck. Sara and Felix had told me that the day we visited the police station.
    Then it hit me! I wrote in big block letters over the little drawing.
    MY PIG JOURNAL
    Instead of my Doomsday Journal, this would be my Good-Day Journal. My little piggy book, full of luck.
    I started writing then, and the words just flowed. How proud I was that I had learned to ride a bike. How amazing it was that I had eaten an egg. How beautiful the opera music had been!
    Yeah, on this trip I really have had a lot of pig.

