 38
The Riesenrad, Part 2
Dad had to go back to work the next morning, but Katarina took the day off and drove the rest of us to the dentist. Eldin only needed a cleaning and one cavity filled, but the dentist decided Mrs. Tahirović needed a root canal. While Sara explained to her mother what was going to happen, Eldin ran around the waiting room, ripping the covers off all the magazines. Katarina suggested that since the dentist was near the Prater, maybe we should take Eldin on a little walk. “Stay as long as you want,” Katarina said, giving Sara some money. “We’ll meet you back at home.”
    I liked Eldin. Sure, he was a little naughty at times, but he reminded me of a puppy dog, running in circles around us. I’d thought escaping from a war zone might have made him shy; instead, he seemed to assume Felix and I were his best friends. He chattered away to us nonstop, although we couldn’t understand a single world. Whenever I asked Sara to translate, she said something like “He said, ‘Pretty bird.’” Or “‘Lot of big cars.’”
    “You’re not translating everything!” Felix scolded her.
    “He’s young,” she said. “Uses too many words. Repeats himself. I get to point.”
    At the Prater, Eldin liked the games and the rocket-ship roller coaster. But he kept grinning and pointing at the Riesenrad. Finally, Sara turned and looked at me.
    It was my last week in Vienna. I was going home next Tuesday[SB534]. I doubted I’d make it to the Prater again, and I really did hope to cross the Riesenrad off my list. Eldin obviously longed to go. I didn’t want [SB535][KL536]to be the type of person who prevented a little kid from going on a Ferris wheel.
    “Let’s try it,” I whispered.
    “What?” Felix asked.
    “I’d like to go on the Riesenrad,” I said a bit louder.
    “You sure?” Sara asked.
    I nodded.
    Sara smiled and went to get the tickets.
    We all stood in line, looking at the Third Man poster once again, just like we had done . . . had it only been seven weeks before? I’d like to say I waltzed onto that ride without the slightest twinge of anxiety, but I’d be lying. In truth, it was almost as scary as it had been before. But this time, I was able to say, I hear you, heart. You’re beating like there are bombs falling overhead. But it’s only the bumper cars next door. I took long, deep breaths, and Felix helped, counting, “One, two, three, four, in. Hold. Eins, zwei, drei, vier, out.” As we got closer to the front of the line, I felt nauseous. Fine, I said to myself, throw up. There’s a trash can over there.
    What I didn’t do was run away.
    Finally, it was our turn. I held Eldin’s hand as the man took our tickets, and his enthusiasm propelled me over the threshold onto the ride. The car was big, bigger than our compartment on the train. I estimated it could hold twenty people easily.
    The conductor shut the door and locked it tight. I still felt dizzy, so I sat down on one of the benches along the side. Eldin ran to look out the window.
    Twenty people fall to their deaths, my brain screamed.
    Sara walked over and I clutched her hand. I closed my eyes, and that’s when we started to move. I was so surprised—it was such a funny motion, like an elevator but moving sideways—that I forgot to be scared and opened them again.
    Felix and Eldin were standing by the window, looking out, and we went to join them.
    The view was amazing! I could see . . . I could see my summer. Stephansdom, the streetcars, the opera, Heldenplatz, Schönbrunn—it seemed like every place we had gone was there, laid out before me in miniature. I was fascinated. It was like the music at the opera, only this time, it was the view that made my nerves fade away.
    The Ferris wheel stopped at the top. I glanced at Felix, but he said, “They’re loading more riders.”
I nodded. Felix and Eldin were pointing things out to each other. They were smiling. My fear was still there, but so was I.     
    “You did it, Becca,” Sara said. “You finished your list.”
    I thought about that. When I’d talked about traveling somewhere, I’d meant by airplane, but a train was close enough. I had eaten an egg, learned to ride a bike, and hung out in a couple of large crowds. And now I was on a Ferris wheel.
    “Nah,” I said. “You’re wrong.”
    “Wrong?”
    “I think you should say we finished my list.”
    “Yes.” Sara smiled[JL538][KL539]. “Very true.”
***
On the way home, we stopped by the Julius Meinl so Sara could pick up a few groceries. She gave Eldin a package of candles and spoke a few words to him. He got so excited, he ran up and down the aisles, waving the candles in the air and shouting.
    “What’s he saying?” I asked.
    Sara sighed. “He’s yelling, ‘It’s my birthday!’ It isn’t, but I told him I would make him a cake.”
    We laughed and lugged the flour back to Katarina’s, only to find Mrs. Tahirović working with Frau Gamperl in her garden. Sara exchanged a few words with her mother. 
    “She says she feels better now[KL541],” Sara reported. “And she likes pruning flowers.”
    Eldin “helped” Sara make the cake, which meant he spilled a cup of flour and broke a glass measuring cup. But the cake was delicious.

