 4
On the Plane
Obediently, I opened my eyes and looked out the window. It had been five years since I had been on a plane[SB40][KL41], and I’d forgotten how cool it was to see the cars and buildings and trees from a different perspective. Before I knew it, we[SB42] were in the clouds, and the ride smoothed out a bit, and takeoff was over.
    I’d done better than I’d expected. I was glad, but it was also frustrating, because I never knew exactly what would set off an attack. [SB43][KL44]I mean, going up in an airplane was a lot scarier than a metal detector, and yet here I was, absolutely fine, while in the airport I had been a sniveling mess.
    Mom and I watched Sister Act until dinner arrived. As I peeled back the plastic from the tray, I saw a beef pot roast, a few tiny potatoes, a cup of clear-broth soup, and a hot roll with warm, melted butter. It actually tasted pretty good! But when I put the meat in my mouth, I started to worry. It was only lukewarm. Did they heat it up properly and it just cooled down? How do they heat meals on an airplane? Is it possible their microwave isn’t functioning correctly?[JL45][KL46]
    “Is everything okay, Becca?” Mom asked.
    “Fine,” I said, “fine.” I wanted to ask if she knew the proper cooking temperature for beef, but I was pretty sure she didn’t. Mom didn’t worry about stuff like that. And I didn’t have a meat thermometer, anyway.
    I carefully covered the rest of the meat with a paper napkin. I ate the soup and the roll, gobbled down the vinegary green bean salad (vinegar is a very effective preservative), and then pulled out the peanut butter and crackers.
    The familiar taste of sticky peanut butter on salty crackers almost made me cry. All the thoughts I was trying so hard not to think came rushing in at once. I didn’t know anyone in Vienna except for my father, and I hadn’t seen him for four months. What if he had changed? I mean, he had changed. He’d sent me a pic, and he had a beard now. He also had a girlfriend.
    That was news he’d dropped on me just last week, on our final phone call before my visit. “Katarina[JL47][KL48] is a newspaper reporter. She’s Austrian and lives two doors down from me.”
    “Oh,” I said. I mean, I assumed my parents dated from time to time, but I’d never met anyone they were seeing before.
    “She wants to come with me to pick you up from the airport.”
    “Okay,” I said politely. “It’ll be nice to meet her.”
    “And get this,” Dad continued on. “She has a son your age. His name is Felix, and he loves to read. He’s a bit on the quiet side, but I’m sure you’ll like him a lot. The au pair will be there too.”
    The French term au pair is b[KL50]asically a fancy word for nanny, a glorified babysitter, usually from another country. It’s really more of a cultural exchange than a traditional childcare arrangement. I only knew what one was because Dad had told me a few days before.
    “What’s her name again?” I asked.
    “Sara Tahirović. I believe she’s Muslim.”
    “How old is she?”
    “Nineteen, I think.”
    “Where’s she from?” I asked. “England? Scotland? Australia?”
    “Sarajevo. That’s in Bosnia.”
    I didn’t know where that was either. “Does she speak English?”
    “Of course, Becca! I’m not going to hire you an au pair who doesn’t speak English.”
“Okay.” [SB51][KL52]I didn’t know what to do. Dad sounded exasperated, but I had     a million more questions. Before I could ask any of them, Mom came in to confirm our arrival times, and then it was time to hang up.
    On the plane, the flight attendant came down the aisle to pick up our dinner trays. Mom pulled out a book while my thoughts continued to swirl. What was Felix like? What TV channels did my dad get? Would Dad remember to buy me a jar of peanut butter? The stewardess came back again, handing out pillows and thin red blankets this time.  Mom and I both took one of each. 
    “Time to get some rest,” Mom said, closing her book and placing it in the seat-back pocket[JL53][KL54]. “I love you, sweetie. Sleep well.” She kissed her fingers and, like always, pressed them to the worry crease between my eyebrows.
    Mom took off her purple glasses and tucked them in next to her novel. She draped her new “travel” sweater (Never wrinkles! Wash in hotel sink!) around her shoulders and tucked the red blanket around her legs. Her eyes closed, and a minute later she was snoring—small, soft, dainty snores. Mom could sleep anywhere, anytime—bus, train, automobile. Sleep was another thing I wasn’t very good at.
    I sat there, staring at the illuminated seat belt sign, trying not to imagine the oxygen masks popping out. I forced my eyes closed and tried to count sheep, but my thoughts would not keep still. Why does it have to be sheep? Could I count kittens? Or pigs? Or baby rabbits? Finally, I ditched the animals and just counted backward from a hundred. I had almost drifted off when we hit a patch of turbulence. I grabbed Mom’s arms so hard, I was sure I had woken her up. But she just mumbled “Feed the gerbils” and turned her head the other way. That was weird. We didn’t even have gerbils.
    I thought about counting gerbils, but instead, I pulled out Doomsday Journal #4. Reading it sometimes helped me to relax when my thoughts wouldn’t stop spinning. Unfortunately, the first page I opened to was page seven:
    How to Prevent Blood Clots on Long Plane Flights
    1.	Get up and walk around as often as possible.
    2.	Wear compression socks.
    3.	Make sure to stretch.
    Okay, then. I guess I’d forget about sleep and do some stretches.
    I crawled over my sleeping mother and walked down the aisle. The bathroom was next to one of the galley kitchens, and there was a bit of room in the aisle between them. I bent over and touched my toes, feeling the blood rush to my head.
    “Nice socks,” said a woman in the seat closest to the kitchen.
    I stood up so quickly I felt dizzy for a moment. The woman wore a white shirt and a blazer. I could see gold hoop earrings peeking out from her shoulder-length hair. She looked vaguely familiar, but I couldn’t figure out why in the world she was complimenting my socks. “They are compression stockings,” I said seriously. “They prevent blood clots.”
    She laughed. “Yes, I know,” she said. She rolled up one leg of her black trousers to reveal her own long, ugly compression stockings.
    I smiled and started to do some heel lifts.
    “Couldn’t sleep?” she asked.
    “No.”
    “Me neither,” she agreed. “You ever been on an international flight before?”
    “No,” I admitted. “Have you?”
    “Lots of times.”
    “Then why can’t you sleep?”
    “I’m thinking about a story I’m working on. I’m a reporter[SB56][KL57].”
    “Cool,” I said. “What’s going on in Vienna?”
    “Lots, I’m sure,” the woman said. “But I’m actually going to Sarajevo.”
    “Oh!” I said. “I’m visiting my dad in Vienna, and the au pair he hired is from Sarajevo.”
    “How nice!” the woman said.[JL58] “Is she a refugee?”
    “Refugee?”
    “There’s a war going on in former Yugoslavia. That’s why I’m going to Bosnia. I’m a correspondent with CNN.”
    “A war reporter!” I exclaimed. “Isn’t that scary?”
    “Sometimes.”
    I stood on one leg, stretching the other while I thought that over. I had heard about the war, of course, watching the news at night with my mom. But I hadn’t paid it much mind. It seemed like something very far away. “Where is Bosnia exactly?” I asked. “I mean, I’m not very good at geography. I thought Austria was the place with the koala bears.”
    “Well,” she said, as she pulled out a cocktail napkin, brushed off some peanut crumbs, and started to draw a little map. “Austria is here. And right next door is the country that used to be called Yugoslavia. It had six states: Serbia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Croatia, Slovenia, Macedonia, and Montenegro. Sarajevo is the capital of Bosnia-Herzegovina.”
    “I’ve never heard of any of those places.”
    “I bet you have,” the woman replied. “In school, didn’t you learn about the beginning of World War I?”
    “Oh yeah!” I remembered. “That archduke guy was assassinated.”
    “Franz Ferdinand,” she reminded me. “And he was killed in Sarajevo.”
    “Oh.” I hadn’t made that connection. “And you’re going there?”
    “Yes.”
    “Then why are you on a plane to Vienna?” I asked.
    “The airport in Sarajevo is closed to all commercial flights. Only a few humanitarian flights are getting in. It’s easier to get there by land. It’s only about a day’s drive from Vienna.”
    My dad was living “only about a day’s drive” from a war zone?! I hadn’t made that connection either. I reached up in the air, stretching as if I were trying to touch the roof of the plane. “What are they fighting about?” I asked.
    She sighed. “The short version is that about two years ago, the country began to break apart, with many of the states declaring their independence. Bosnia-Herzegovina was one of the most diverse, containing Bosnian Muslims, Serbs, and Croats. Even though they had lived together in peace for many years, they had different views of the course their country should take. Fighting broke out when the Serbs tried to take control of the region.”
    “So it’s a civil war?” I asked.
    She nodded[JL59][KL60]. “Your au pair is lucky she got out when she did. There are reports of . . . horrible things happening to young women in Bosnia now.”
    “Then why are you going?” I asked.
    “Sometimes you have to do scary things. Because they are important to you. I want the world to know the truth about the war, so I have to go.”[SB61][KL62]
    I stared, my stretches forgotten. She was clearly much, much braver than me.
    “Getting tired?” she asked.
    “A little,” I admitted.
    “Me too. I’m going to try to get some rest. They’ll serve coffee in a couple of hours. And croissants with butter and jam. They’re delicious.”
    “I’m too young for coffee.”
    “Hmm,” she said. “You’re old enough to ask real questions about the world. I think that makes you old enough for coffee too.”
    She handed me the napkin map, and I went back to my seat. I must have dozed a little, because the next thing I remember was Little Red Riding Hood coming by and asking, “Coffee or tea?”
     Hot chocolate, please[JL63][KL64] was right on the tip of my tongue; I knew they had it, because I had read that it was one of the beverage options in the in-flight magazine. But Mom was still asleep, and the flight was almost over, and when I opened my mouth, what came out was “Coffee, please.”
    I froze, surprised at my own daring. But the flight attendant didn’t bat an eyelash, just picked up a ceramic mug and asked, “Milk and sugar?”
    “Yes, thank you.”
    Mom was still snoring softly as I raised the cup to my lips. It smelled bitter and sweet. I took a sip. It tasted like confidence.

