 5
The Welcoming Committee
Mom finally woke up as the flight attendant was collecting my breakfast dishes. The croissant had been delicious. Mom got up to go to the bathroom near the kitchen and came back with a croissant and a cup of coffee. “Becca!” she whispered excitedly, still standing in the aisle. “Hester Madden is on this plane!”
    “Who’s that?”
    “She’s a CNN reporter.”
    “Oh yeah! I met her last night.”
    “What?”
    “I couldn’t sleep, and . . . we had a whole conversation about Bosnia.”
    “That’s so exciting!” Mom said.
    “Yeah, she’s really nice.” I paused. “Mom, do you think it’s safe in Vienna?”
    “What?”
    “I mean, Ms. Madden said it’s only a day’s drive to where the fighting is in Sarajevo.”
    Mom[SB65] sat down next to me and looked straight in my eyes. “Becca, there is nothing for you to worry about. You’re completely safe in Austria. The war in Bosnia will not affect you at all.”
    I wasn’t so sure. Still, I had more immediate things to worry about—like getting off the plane.
    Landing wasn’t quite as scary as taking off[SB66][KL67], even though technically it’s just as dangerous. (See DJ #1, p. 5)  I think it was easier because even with the coffee, I was so tired it was hard to think about anything except sleep. My mother held my hand from the time we started our descent until we touched down.
    Mom was so excited she was practically bouncing up and down as we picked up our bags and waited to go through customs. “Your father said he would give me a ride to the train station. Once I get to Salzburg, I’ll find my hostel and take a little walk around to get oriented. Then tomorrow I’m going to do the Sound of Music tour, and then the salt mines the day after that, and then I’m going to rent a car and go see the castles in Bavaria.”
    I tried to catch her excitement. Here I was in a real foreign airport! But it looked pretty much like the airport I had just left, except the signs were in English and German. Mom and I handed the man at customs our passports. “I’m visiting my dad,” I volunteered. He stamped my booklet and waved us through.
    The airport was fairly small. I saw an old man being greeted by a group of smiling children. I watched [JL68][KL69]a young woman run up to her boyfriend and kiss him. But I didn’t see my father. Did we miss him? Did we get the day wrong? Did—
    “Becca!”
    I turned around and there he was.
    His brown hair was longer, but I liked his short beard. Instead of jeans, he wore khaki pants and a button-down shirt. He’d traded in his sneakers for expensive-looking leather shoes. I waved and a grin spread across his face.
    Dad ran toward me and gave me a big hug. He smelled the same. He sounded the same. He was still my good old dad.
    “Was the plane okay?” he asked.
    I nodded and squeezed harder.
    “She did great,” Mom said. “I was so proud of her.”
    “Thanks for bringing her over,” Dad said.
    “Of course.” Mom said[JL70][KL71]. “This turned out to be a win-win for all of us.”
    I wasn’t so sure about that, but before I could protest, Dad turned to introduce a woman standing just behind him. She was dressed in a black skirt and a pink blouse, her hair curled around her shoulders, and she was wearing a full face of makeup. She looked as if she were going to a party, even though it was barely seven in the morning local time.
    “Becca,” Dad said. “I’d like you to meet my girlfriend, Katarina.” He grinned like a dorky teenager who had just won one of those stupid giant stuffed animals at the county fair.
    Katarina grabbed my hand and began pumping it up and down. “It is so lovely to meet you! We are going to have such a wonderful summer.” She spoke near-perfect English with a slight British accent.
    “Hi,” I managed to choke out.
    My mom smiled and shook Katarina’s hand pleasantly, and they exchanged “Nice to meet yous.”
    When they were done, Katarina pushed forward a skinny boy with curly blond hair. “Becca, I want you to meet my son, Felix.”
    Felix barely looked up from the book he was reading. In fact, he didn’t move his head at all, just flicked his eyes up to get the briefest glimpse of me, then went back to his reading.
    “Hallo,” he whispered to the words in his book.
    His hair fell over his eyes and ears as if he had missed a haircut. Dad had said Felix was my age, but he must have misunderstood, because Felix looked about nine years old.
    “Hey, Felix,” I said, as friendly as I could.
    He kept reading.
    Katarina beamed, as if she thought our introduction had gone extremely well. “I’m sure the two of you are going to be best friends!”
    Oh yeah. At home I always hung out with nine-year-olds.
    “And this is Sara,” Dad said, pointing to a young woman behind him. “She’s going to be your and Felix’s au pair!”
    I’d imagined Sara as a plain, smiling girl, like Fräulein Maria, except with a headscarf instead of a wimple. This Sara looked nothing like that. She had light-brown hair with a streak in the front dyed neon green. Her lipstick was way too red, and she had caked on a bunch of green eye shadow. She was wearing a black dress and black sandals and had a silver [JL72][KL73]necklace with a small star and crescent moon around her neck.
    “Nice to meet you,” Sara said shyly. Her green eye shadow matched her hair, and she had a stronger accent than Katarina.
    “Sara also speaks Bosnian, Latin, a little Russian, French, and German,” Katarina said.
    “I don’t speak any of those,” I said.
    “No problem!” Katarina said. “Felix attends the International School, where all the classes are in English. So if there are any words Sara doesn’t know, he can translate.”
    Felix actually glanced up from his book at that. He looked about as pleased as I felt.
    Yeah, kid, I felt like saying. It’s going to be a long summer.
    “What a great experience for the children!” Mom exclaimed.
    “That’s exactly what I said!” Katarina agreed. 
    Dad picked up our bags and led the way to his car, followed by Katarina and Mom, who were chatting away like old friends. Sara, Felix, and I walked behind them; we didn’t say a word. [JL76][KL77]Right before we went outside to the parking lot, Sara put a hand on Katarina’s shoulder. “Wait one moment, please?” she asked.
    “Of course,” said Katarina.
    We all stood and waited while Sara intently studied a small bulletin board hung on a wall between car-rental signs. I wasn’t sure what it was. It looked like a bunch of handwritten notes pinned with old thumbtacks. She took a piece of paper from her pocket and pinned it to the board.
    “Any luck?” Katarina asked when Sara returned to our group.
    Sara shook her head.
    Before I could ask any questions, Dad shooed us out the door. His car wasn’t far, and we dumped our bags in the trunk. Dad, Katarina, and Mom squeezed into the front seat; Felix, Sara, and I climbed into the back.
    Mom and Katarina kept up a light, chattery conversation, Mom telling us all the places she wanted to visit and Katarina offering suggestions. From time to time, Dad would chime in. Felix pretended to read, but I could tell he was listening to their conversation.
    “They’re divorced?” he whispered to me finally.
    “Yeah.”
    “But . . . they get along so well,” he said.
    I shrugged. “Doesn’t your mom talk to your dad sometimes?”
    Felix turned his attention back to his book. By the time I realized he wasn’t going to answer, we were already on the highway. It seemed too weird to repeat myself, so instead I turned to Sara and asked, “What were you doing at the airport?”
    “My family stayed behind in Sarajevo,” she answered. “I hope they come to Vienna. I think, maybe they left a note.”
    “But if your family comes to Vienna, wouldn’t they just call you?”
    “I sent them a letter with my number.” Sara sighed. “But I not sure they got it. I only received one letter from them. So I posted this.” She handed me a copy of a piece of notebook paper. In neat block letters she had written, Ich suche Petra Tahirović, 44, und Eldin Tahirović, 6. There was a phone number at the bottom.
    “That’s my mom and little brother,” she explained.
    “Oh.” I tried to give the paper back to her, but she shook her head. “Keep it. I have many copies.”
    Dad was already pulling up to the train station, so I folded up the paper and stuffed it into my pocket. I climbed out of the back seat and Mom and I waited on the curb while Dad got her bag out of the trunk.
    “They all seem nice,” Mom said.
    “Yeah,” I agreed. 
    I could feel Felix and Sara watching me from the inside of the car. I was determined not to cry.
    Mom gave me a long hug, but it felt awkward, as if I were a fish, already slipping out of her grasp.
    “You have the list of all the places I’m staying,” Mom said. “You can always give me a call.”
    I nodded.
    Then Mom kissed her fingers and pressed them to my forehead[JL79][KL80].
    That’s when I cried.
    “Becca,” Mom said. “You can do it. You’re going to have a wonderful summer.”
    She hoisted her backpack onto her shoulder, pulled up the handle of her roller bag (Purple! So no one will mistake it for theirs), and walked off toward her own adventure.
    Leaving me to deal with mine.

