 7
The Honor System
I put on some pajamas and brushed my teeth and tried to go to sleep the proper way this time. But I tossed and turned for what seemed like forever. My room was hot and stuffy, the bed lumpy in unfamiliar ways. What if there are bedbugs? What if I get a heat rash? I wanted to write down my worries, but my limbs felt heavy, as if I’d been lifting weights. I must have drifted off again at some point, because the next time I opened my eyes, light was pouring in through the open curtains. I felt groggy and disoriented, as if something had woken me up out of a dream I couldn’t quite remember. Then I heard it again—someone was pounding on the front door.
    I jumped out of bed, my heart thumping in time with the knocking. I was terrified. What are you supposed to do in Austria if someone tries to break into your house? Call 911? I didn’t know. Why don’t I have a page about this in my journal?!
    The pounding continued, so I crept down the stairs. I gathered my courage and then tiptoed my way to the front door to peek out the window. The person pounding on Dad’s front door was . . . Felix.
    Honestly, I was surprised that such a small, skinny boy could make such a racket. In any case, I pulled open the front door and demanded, “What do you want?”
    Felix cringed under my gaze. “Ich . . . I . . . Wir . . .”
    I felt a little bad then. He had a book tucked under one arm, and he was wearing leather sandals, as well as khaki shorts and a red T-shirt with a pocket on the front. And that’s when I remembered I was still in my pajamas.
    I hoped I was wearing the striped ones or even the polka dots. But from Felix’s expression, I had a sinking feeling they were the ones with frogs wearing leis and grass skirts. I was too scared to glance down and find out.
    “Hallo!” Sara said, walking up the front steps. Her stripe of hair was a brilliant emerald [SB116]in the sunlight; she wore black jeans and a black T-shirt. She still had on the silver necklace. “Time to go.” She stopped short when she saw me. “Why you wearing underwear? And why is it covered with . . . Frösche[JL117][KL118]?”
    “Frogs,” Felix whispered.
    Oh yeah. I was so glad he was there to translate. “It’s not underwear,” I stated. “They’re pajamas.”
    “Ah,” Sara said. “But it is hour nine.”
    That’s when I remembered what Dad had told me in his note. I was supposed to go sightseeing with the two of them today. “Oh, I’m sorry,” I said. “I overslept. You’ll have to go without me.”
    I moved to close the door, but Sara stuck her foot inside.
    “No,” she said.
    “No?” I asked.
    “I show you city.” She held up an envelope with my father’s handwriting on it. “Your father left money. He said have fun.”
    I stared at her. She sounded like a bossy grandmother. “It’s okay,” I said. “I can stay home.”
    She shook her head. “Your father said you do not like to be left alone. Get rid of Frosch underwear. Find real clothes!” Her face suddenly softened a little. “You have real clothes?”
    I was mid eye roll when I remembered she had fled her home. I wondered what she had been able to bring with her. “Okay,” I said. “Give me five minutes.”
    I found myself running up to my room and tearing through my suitcase, not quite sure why I was rushing to please this teenage babysitter. I pulled out jean shorts and a T-shirt, ran a comb through my hair, brushed my teeth, and put on my sneakers. Four minutes and thirty-three seconds later, I was back on the front porch.[SB119][KL120]
    Sara was staring at her watch. It had a large gold face and seemed too big for her wrist. She grunted in approval. “Good. Time to go.”
    I grabbed my purse and locked the door.
    “Where are we going?” I asked.
    “The city,” she said.
    An older woman gardening in the yard next to us stood up and called out to Sara. They had a short exchange in German, then Sara said in English, “This is Becca, Ben’s daughter. She’s visiting for the summer.”
    The woman took off one gardening glove and stuck it into a pocket in her dress. She looked like she had stepped out of The Sound of Music, wearing a blue dirndl with a red apron, a white blouse, and clunky black shoes. “Nice to meet you,” she said pleasantly, holding out her hand. “You may call me Frau Gamperl.”
    I shook her hand.
    “Make sure you sort your trash properly,” Frau Gamperl told me. “Americans always have trouble with that. You can’t just throw all the glass in the same bin! Grün means green, and braun means . . .”
    “Sorry,” Sara said. “We need to catch bus.” She led Felix and me down the block.
    “Don’t forget to bring me your Biomüll for my flowers!” Frau Gamperl called after us.
    “What’s Biomüll?” I asked Felix.
    “Compost,” he whispered to his book.
    We followed Sara to a bench with a red-and-white sign on a pole that said, “Autobus Haltestelle.” Felix sat down on the bench, but when I tried to do the same, Sara took my arm and marched me over to a little open-air shop on the side of the road. It said “Tabak” in big letters at the top. There was a man standing beside a row of newspapers. Behind him I could see a postcard display and a carton of cigarettes.
    “Tabak?” I asked. “Is this a tobacco shop?” Did my father leave me with a babysitter who smokes? Secondhand smoke could kill. I had the statistics. In either Doomsday Journal #2 or #3[JL121][KL122].
    Sara rolled her eyes. “No. You need a Monatskarte.” She said something to the man in German, then pulled out a bill from the envelope and handed it to him. He handed her back a square of thin cardboard. “Danke,” she said, then led me back to the bench where Felix was waiting.
    Out of the envelope, Sara pulled a small square photograph. She rummaged in the green purse she carried, found a role of tape, and stuck the picture to the cardboard. Then she handed it to me.
    I recognized the picture she had taped to the card. I had taken it with my dad at the airport, right before he had left for Vienna. Someone had cut it down, so it looked almost like a headshot of me, except I could still see part of Dad’s arm in one corner. “What’s this?” I asked.
    “Bus ticket,” said Sara. “For month July.”
    I studied it. At the top it said, 1. Juli bis 31. Juli, Monatskarte, 1993[JL123][KL124].
    Before I could ask how it worked, the bus pulled up. There was a group of people waiting, so we all scrambled to get in line.
    When I trudged up the steps, I held out the card for the driver to see. He didn’t even glance at me. “Excuse me, sir,” I said, holding up my card.
    A young man pushed past me, not even waiting to show his ticket.
    The driver finally turned to look at me. “Ja?”
    I held up my ticket. But he just gave me a funny look and waved me on.
    Felix and Sara had already sat down.
    “Why didn’t he check my ticket?” I asked.
    “Ehrensystem,” Sara said.
    I gave her a look.
    “I don’t know the English word,” Sara admitted.
    We both turned to look at Felix.
    “Honor system,” he whispered.
    “What are you talking about?” I exclaimed. “You mean they just trust everyone to buy a ticket?”
    Sara and Felix both nodded.
    “Then why would anyone ever buy a ticket?”
    “There are random ticket inspections,” Felix whispered. “If they catch you without a ticket, there’s a big fine.”
    “Schwarzfahren,” Sara said.
    “That’s what we call riding without a ticket,” Felix explained. “It’s bad.”
    “You mean to tell me,” I said, “the whole bus line works on the honor system?”
    “No, of course not,” Felix said. “The streetcars, subways, and local trains also run on the honor system.”
    I stared at them.
    “America is different?” Sara asked.
    “Yeah,” I said. “Very different.”
    Felix put his nose back into his book, and I looked out the window. At my school, they didn’t trust you to buy lunch without checking your ID; it didn’t make sense that a whole city would trust its citizens to buy a bus ticket.
    And yet the bus was very clean and seemed new. There were businessmen in suits and old women clutching baskets, actual wicker baskets, full of food. I stared out the window. This part of Vienna didn’t really look like a city, more like the suburbs. Some of the houses were in new developments, like where my father lived, but others were crumbling, as if they were hundreds of years old. Which, I realized, maybe they were.
    I was about to ask Sara when she stood up suddenly and pushed a button on a pole in the middle of the bus. A moment later the bus swerved to a stop, and she motioned for us to get off.
    “Are we in the city already?” I asked as I walked down the bus steps.
    “No,” she said. “Time for breakfast.”

