 10
The Riesenrad
I am not a fan of amusement parks, not even the pretty, heavily regulated ones like Disney World. Which this wasn’t. No, this reminded me of one of those traveling carnivals, with old rides that looked like they had not been inspected in about one hundred years. There was a rickety roller coaster and a decrepit merry-go-round with peeling painted horses and lots of carnival games with [SB161]cheap prizes like giant stuffed tigers and neon-pink hats. And towering over everything was an enormous Ferris wheel.
    “No,” I said, stopping outside the entrance. “I don’t want to go.”
    Sara looked confused. “I pay,” she coaxed. “Money from father.”
    I shook my head.
    “Come on,” Felix urged. “We’re already here! Let’s at least go on a roller coaster.”
    I shook my head again. Maybe they had a death wish, but I didn’t. Do you know how many fatalities and/or maimings can be attributed to subpar safety inspections of traveling carnival equipment? Well, I do. At least, I did. It was written down at home in Doomsday Journal #2. And I wasn’t going to risk my life for a few thrills on some stupid roller coaster that looked like a fake rocket ship.
    “No, thank you,” I said. “I don’t like roller coasters.”
    Sara looked confused. “You said . . .”
    “Look, I didn’t know what the Prater was,” I explained. “I thought it was a museum or an old bridge or something.”
    “Ach du meine Güte!” exclaimed Felix. “We’re here, I’m going on some rides. If you don’t want to come, you can just wait for me.”
    He stormed off. Sara looked at me for a long moment, not saying anything. Finally, I shrugged and trudged after him. Sara and I waited on a bench as Felix went into the fun house, with its mirrors and dead ends. But I saw her looking longingly at the rocket-ship roller coaster. “Do you like roller coasters?” I asked.
    “Yes. And my little brother loves them.”
    “What’s his name again[SB162]?” I asked.
    “Eldin,” she said. “He’s six.”
    Six. And he was already braver than me. I sighed.
    Felix came out then. “All right!” he [KL164]said. “The rocket ship is next. Who’s coming?”
    “Sara,” I said.
    “No, no,” she protested.
    “It’s okay,” I said. “I’ll just sit here and wait for you.”
    Felix grabbed her hand. “Come on.”
    “No,” Sara said seriously. “Becca’s father said she gets nervous sometimes. I not leave her alone.”
    I was suddenly furiously, irrationally angry. Of course my father would have told Sara about my anxiety, but I wasn’t a baby.
    “My dad exaggerates sometimes,” I said, my heart pounding. “I can sit on a bench by myself for five minutes.”
    Sara still looked doubtful. “You sure, Becca?”
    “Go!” I ordered. “Enjoy it for your little brother.”
    “Okay,” she said. “We come right back.”
    I waved, they ran off, and as soon as they were gone, I thought, Oh my goodness, what have I done? I was alone. In a strange country where I didn’t speak the language. This was why Dad had gotten me a nanny in the first place! What if something happens? What if I get sick? What if I get kidnapped?!
    I tried to take a deep breath. I’d looked up the safety statistics on Austria when Dad had first moved here. It had one of the lowest homicide rates in the world! So why am I so worried about sitting on a bench by myself? Other people did normal things, like riding a bike or going waterskiing. Lots of kids flew on planes without their mother. Some even went on roller coasters. Felix might look young, but I was the one acting like a little kid.
    Glumly, I watched the rocket-ship roller coaster dip and turn in front of the towering Ferris wheel. Like the streetcars (and the Austrian flag), the Ferris wheel was red and white. It didn’t have open-air seating; instead, each of the compartments was the size of a passenger van. And something about it looked familiar. I couldn’t help staring and wondering, What’s the view like at the top? What would it feel like to go up in the air? To go around and around and around?
    I looked over at the booth selling Ferris wheel tickets and noticed a movie poster: The Third Man. I knew that movie! It was the one Dad had made me watch a couple of days after our pancake brunch. The one that was set in Vienna and starred Orson Welles. In the film, there was a big scene on a Ferris wheel. This Ferris wheel!
    I wanted to prove that I wasn’t a scaredy-cat—to Sara and Felix, to my dad, and most of all, to myself. So when Felix and Sara returned smiling from the roller coaster, I forced myself to stand up and say, “Hey, why don’t we go on the Ferris wheel?”
    They both stopped short. “The Riesenrad?” Sara asked.
    “What’s that?”
    “The name of the Ferris wheel,” said Felix. “It literally means giant wheel.”
    My heart started to beat like crazy. My hands were clammy, but I forced them into fists and said, “Cool. Let’s go.”
    Sara looked doubtful. “You said you scared of roller coasters.”
    “Yeah,” I agreed. “But the Riesenrad isn’t a roller coaster. I’ve been watching it. It moves nice and slow.”
    “But your father said . . .”
    “My dad wants me to try new things,” I argued. My voice only shook a little. “It’s why I came to Vienna.”
    “Okay, okay,” Sara said. “We go buy tickets.”
    I was fine—excited even—as we stood in line to buy our tickets. It wasn’t until we took our place in the line to get into one of the cars that it started to feel like the metal detector at the airport.
    I tried to take deep breaths like Dr. Teresa had taught me. I drummed on the railing, tapping my fingers to a chant in my head: It’s perfectly safe. It’s perfectly safe.[JL166][KL167]
    Sara looked at me. “You okay, Becca?” she asked.
    This was my chance to be brave. “Yeah,” I said.
    Sara didn’t look like she believed me, but she didn’t say anything. There were seven of us waiting in line: Felix, Sara, and me; a mother with a toddler sleeping in a stroller; and two teenagers, a boy and a girl about Sara’s age, who kept their hands in each other’s back pockets. The attendant opened the door to one of the compartments, and the previous riders got off. It was almost our turn to board.
    That’s when I noticed the sign that stated the Riesenrad had been built in 1897. Which meant it was nearly a hundred years old. One hundred years old! Plenty of time for parts to wear out. Or rust. Or . . . My neck started to sweat. I breathed even faster.
    I forced myself to think about something else. I caught sight of the Third Man poster again. Which made me think of the part of the movie where Orson Welles (who plays the bad guy in the film) is up on the Ferris wheel and talking about how the people below look like dots and how no one would care if they stopped moving. But my parents would care if our car detached and fell to the ground. I would care. There’d be a funeral and . . . and . . . they probably wouldn’t be able to have an open casket because my body would be so mangled and . . .
    That was when I realized I had made a horrible mistake. My heart was racing; I felt like I was going to throw up. My hands felt numb, my fingers tingling as if I had been sitting on them and they had fallen asleep. My chest hurt and I gasped for breath.
    I heard one of the teenagers ask “Was ist los mit ihr?” and even though I couldn’t understand the words, I knew he was talking about me.
    Sara put her hand on my shoulder. “No worries,” she said. “Just loading passengers.”
    “I feel sick,” I managed to choke out, jerking away from Sara and running to the bathroom.
    I made it into a stall before I burst into tears. I was shaking, hot one second and cold the next; I dry heaved a couple of times but didn’t throw up. I was exhausted and embarrassed, but mainly I was disappointed. I had actually wanted to go on the Riesenrad. I’d wanted to see the view. I’d wanted to prove I could be brave. And I had failed. I sobbed and sobbed, leaning against the side of the stall.
    And then, as if that weren’t bad enough, someone knocked on the stall door.
    “It’s occupied,” I called out, confused. It was a big bathroom; there were plenty of empty stalls.
    “Ist alles in Ordnung?” I heard a strange woman ask. “Kann ich irgendwie helfen?”
    I peeked through the stall doors and saw an older woman with gray hair wearing a white apron and clutching a roll of paper towels. Another woman was at the sink, washing her hands. When she finished, the gray-haired woman handed her a paper towel, and the other woman placed a coin into an ashtray on the counter.
    She was a bathroom attendant! My dad had warned me about this. Some bathrooms in Austria weren’t free—you had to pay to use them. And I didn’t have any money!
    My panic, which had almost started to subside, soared again. Even bathrooms in Austria weren’t safe! I waited until the gray-haired woman was busy giving another girl a paper towel, and then I burst out of the stall. I tore out of the park, past the fun house and the roller coaster, running without purpose or direction, just trying to get away.
    Finally, the stitch in my side got too strong, and I collapsed onto a bench. I sobbed in relief. Great big hysterical sobs. The kind that felt like they would never stop.
    “Becca?” I heard a voice ask.
    I looked up. Sara waited on the sidewalk, a good ten feet away. Felix hovered behind her.
    “Go away,” I muttered.
    I was so utterly embarrassed. Except for Mom and Dad, no one had ever seen me like this, not even my best friend, Chrissy.
    But Sara didn’t go away. Instead, she approached slowly, as if I were a wild animal that might bolt. Sara sat down on one side of the bench; Felix perched on the other end and pulled out his book. I was grateful that he was at least going to pretend he wasn’t listening.
    I tensed and waited for the lecture. It’s okay. You’re safe. Don’t cry. But it didn’t come. Sara just sat there. Felix read on. A couple of kids walked by, but they didn’t even glance at me. It was hot, and a nearby trash can smelled bad. Eventually, I gave one last little gasp/hiccup and stopped crying.
    Still nothing.
    “I’m sorry,” I said when I couldn’t stand the silence anymore.
    Sara shrugged. “Worse things have happened.”
    “It’s embarrassing.”
    “Why?” Sara asked. “Your father warned me you might get nervous.”
    “But you bought the tickets, and we didn’t even get to go!” My father would be upset about that too. It was just like when I’d wanted to see Les Mis on my birthday.
    “You tried be brave,” Sara said. “That’s worth a a little money.”
    “But I failed.”
    Sara shrugged again. “Maybe next time you won’t.”
    Felix sat still as a statue.
    “I wanted to see the view,” I admitted. “My dad and I watched the movie . . .”
    “The Third Man,” Felix finished, whispering to the pages in his book.
    “You’ve seen it too?”
    Felix nodded. “My father likes old American movies. Sometimes he takes me to the English-language theater. It has all the movies in their original language with German subtitles. Most movies here are dubbed into German. Subtitles are so much better.”
    “Why?” I asked.
    Felix gave me a look. “Sara made me go see The Bodyguard at a regular theater. Imagine Whitney Houston and Kevin Costner speaking in German!”
    I snorted.
    “And then, as if that wasn’t awkward enough, Whitney’s character randomly starts singing in English. Because they don’t bother to dub the songs.”
    “Beautiful movie,” Sara put in. “So romantic!”
    “It’s awful,” Felix insisted. “But good for a laugh.”
    I gave a weak smile. “Where does your dad live?”
    “He’s an actor, so he moves around a lot,” Felix said.
    “Cool,” I said. “What’s he been in?”
    “Nothing you’d know,” Felix said. “I think he’s in Graz right now.”
    “When do you see him?” I asked. “I mean, what’s your custody schedule? Week on, week off? Or weekends? Or do you . . .”
    Felix stared at the Ferris wheel. “He sees me when he can.”
    “Oh,” I said.
    “He’s not like your dad,” he added, so quietly I almost couldn’t hear.
    “Oh,” I said again.
    Felix shrugged. “I’m sorry I pressured you to go on the rides. Mama told me you sometimes get anxious, but I thought she was just . . .”
    “It’s okay.” I was still embarrassed, but I was also thinking about what he had said about his father. My dad had moved to Vienna, but he had never once missed our Sunday phone call. What would it feel like not to be exactly sure where your father lived? And what did Sara mean when she said worse things have happened?
    It was such a pretty day. It must have been an amazing view from the top of the Riesenrad. I felt another pang of regret deep in my stomach, but I didn’t think I was going to throw up anymore.
    “We leave now?” Sara asked.
    “Sure,” I said.
    We stood up and walked back to the subway. I was quiet as we took it partway across town and then switched back to streetcar 38. I felt sick again as the jerky motion of the streetcar rocked me back and forth. It was crowded, and I had to stand, holding on to an orange strap hanging from the ceiling. It was too high for me and made my arm ache. Every time I lost my balance, the woman standing next to me glared. “Aufpassen!” she yelled.
    I would have done what she wanted, but I didn’t understand.
    Then Sara ushered us off the streetcar and onto the bus. [JL172][SB173][KL174]“You okay?” Sara asked.
    “Yes,” I said. Parts of the day had been really fun, but now I just felt like I was a wet towel and someone had tried to squeeze all the water out of me. I couldn’t wait to get home, eat a nice quiet dinner with my father, and watch some TV. Dad said he sometimes watched Full House dubbed into German to practice his language skills. I wanted to see that.
    My feet ached as we walked up Dad’s front steps. It was after five, and I pictured my father sitting on the couch, reading a book. Maybe we’d have grilled cheese sandwiches and tomato soup for dinner. That was what Dad always cooked for me when I was feeling down. I could almost taste the melted cheese in my mouth as I put the key in the lock.
    But as I opened the door, it wasn’t the smell of toasted bread that wafted out. Instead, it smelled like meat and spices. And on the stereo, blasting at full volume, was an opera.

