 14
The Bridge
Sara sipped at her peppermint tea. “I mention the bridge near my house, yes?”
    “Yeah,” I said. “The one you’d walk across with your mom and little brother and eat ice cream.”
    She nodded. “When Serbian snipers first moved into the hills, they started targeting that bridge. People were already leaving the city, and sometimes they could not take their pets with them. One day, I watched a little dog walk back and forth across the bridge. All day long he walked, looking for his owner. Poor little sad dog. Finally, he started to howl. Then a sniper shot him.”
    “What a terrible nightmare!” I said.
    “That not my dream,” Sara said. “I saw that happen.”
    “A man shot a dog for barking?”
    “Yes.”
    “That’s awful!” I shivered and tucked the blanket in closer around me.
    “My dream,” Sara continued, “was about my little brother’s birthday. He was turning six. We were in our apartment in Sarajevo. Mama scrambled eggs for breakfast. The war was still going on—I knew because I could see the bullet hole above the stove. The first week of fighting,[SB207][KL208] a sniper missed my mother by only a few inches. There was blue paint on the wall, and it left a big white crater where the bullet lodged in the plaster. That’s when we started closing the blinds.
    “In my dream, my mother put out yellow crocheted place mats. They looked bright and cheerful, even with only strips of light coming in through the blinds. As we ate, she showed us some German marks she had saved.”
    “German marks?” I asked. “Don’t you have your own money?”
    “Of course. But when the war started, there was lots of inflation. Pretty soon, our money not worth much anymore. Mama had saved this money for a special occasion. ‘I go to the market and buy flour, sugar, eggs, and butter, so I can make Eldin a real cake for his birthday!’ she announced in my dream.
    “Eldin clapped his hands for joy and went to play in his room with his toy trucks. I begged Mama not to go. Too dangerous. But she insisted: ‘War or no war, my son will have a cake for his birthday.’ She put on a white sweater, very fluffy, like a rabbit, something you wear to a party, not the market. I knew it was a dream, because Mama would never buy something so impractical. She picked up my purse, the little green one, said, ‘Keep an eye on Eldin while I am gone,’ and marched out the door.
“She was gone all day. Much too long for a trip to the market. Eldin and I looked out the window, saw boats float by, people by the river. It was like everyone had forgotten there was a war.     Finally, I spotted Mama coming back from the market. She was walking across the bridge, with the white sweater and my bright-green purse, carrying a bag of groceries. She waved at us, as if to say I got everything! and we waved back. I told Eldin, ‘Put your shoes on; let’s go meet her.’ But before we could walk out the door, there was a loud bang.
    “I ran to the window; I could see Mama lying on the ground. Right where the dog had fallen. And her white sweater was slowly turning red. I screamed and ran from the building, forgetting all about Eldin. I got to the bridge, and I found the green purse and the groceries, the bags of flour and sugar smeared with blood. But she was not there. I not find her anywhere. I screamed again and again and . . . and then you woke me up.”
    We sat there on the couch for a long time. The music played on in the background; the rain fell hard on the roof. I took a sip of my tea, but the minty water tasted wrong in my mouth. That was a terrible nightmare, and the worst part was, Sara couldn’t walk to the next room and see her mother peacefully sleeping. She couldn’t give her a call in the morning and laugh about her overactive imagination. She couldn’t reassure herself it was just a dream. Because she didn’t know where her mother was.
    “I’m sorry,” I mumbled finally.
    “Maybe I heard the thunder in my sleep,” Sara mused. “Maybe that why I dreamed about hearing shots.”
    “Yeah.”
    “Eldin had no cake on his real birthday,” Sara said. “He was so sad.”
    “Tell me another story about your mom,” I said. “A happy one. Maybe that will get the . . . bad taste of the dream out of your head.”
    Sara took a sip of her tea and thought for a moment. She ran her fingers through her messy hair.
    “Before I left Sarajevo, a friend came over one day[JL210][KL211]. Her aunt was hairdresser, but she had left for Holland the week before. My friend brought over all her hair dyes. We looked through the colors.
    “I wanted to dye my hair green. The color of grass. Leaves. My favorite color. But Mama got so upset! She screamed. She yelled. She said a good girl never has green hair. I said I was eighteen. No one saw me anyway, so why did my hair color matter? I ran to my room and slammed the door.
    “I forget about the argument. But a few weeks later, I was on the bus, alone, on my way to Croatia, and I looked in my bag for dry socks. At the very bottom, I found a small box with a note: For Sara. I love you. It was the green hair dye.”
    “She changed her mind!” I exclaimed.
    “No.” Sara said. “She still hate green hair. But she loves me more. When I got to Austria, first thing I did was dye my hair. It will stay green until I see Mama again.”
    We smiled at each other. I’d assumed Sara’s green hair was some sort of teenage-rebellion thing. I’d never expected it to be a reminder of her mother. I had more questions—lots, in fact—but the front door opened then, and we both jumped.
    “Oh!” my father said, walking in the door and shaking off his umbrella. “You’re still up.”
    “The thunder woke me,” I said. “Sara and I were just chatting.”
    “Nice,” Dad said.
    “Did your evening go well?” I asked.
    “Great!” Dad said. “Such wonderful colleagues. I’m exhausted, though. You heading back to bed?”
    I glanced at Sara. She had gone back to staring into her mug. “No, I think I’ll sleep here tonight. Have a girls’ sleepover.”
    “Okay,” Dad said. “Don’t stay up too late!”
    He gave Sara a wave, blew me a kiss, and turned off the table lamp. I heard him carefully make his way up the stairs, and once his door closed, Sara whispered in the dark, “Thank you for staying, Becca.”
    “Of course,” I said. “I know what it’s like to feel afraid.”
    We didn’t talk any more after that. The music ended, but the rain pattered on. My toes were warm under the blanket; the pillow was cool under my cheek. I listened to Sara’s breathing turn slow and even. And as I drifted off myself, I thought, It feels really nice to have a new friend. [SB212][KL213]

