 16
The List
The zoo was part of Schloss Schönbrunn, a vast palace complete with formal gardens, a maze, and a fake Roman building on a hill. Felix said Schönbrunn had been the summer residence of the Hapsburgs, the royal family that had ruled over the Austro-Hungarian Empire. The palace was a bright, cheery yellow, longer than it was tall, with lots and lots of windows.
    “Can we go inside?” I asked.
    “Tour is boring,” Sara said. “Let us go to Tiergarten and eat first.”
    “Tiergarten,” Felix informed me, “literally means animal garden. But you can also just call it the Zoo.” He pronounced it as if zoo rhymed with toe. “Founded in 1752, it’s the oldest continuously operated zoo in the world.”
    We sat down on a bench and opened our picnic basket. The sun was shining, every building was the same cheery yellow, and the food was good, yet it felt like the chill of the police station had still not left me.
    I tried to listen as Felix prattled on about facts and dates, but the animals looked kind of depressed to me. They were in old-fashioned cages with bars and cement floors. No carefully sculpted habitats. Not even any plants. I watched a lion pace back and forth, back and forth, trapped like my thoughts in an endless loop. His eyes were sad, his mane scraggly, and somehow, he reminded me of the old man at the police station who had grabbed my purse.
    “Sara,” I asked suddenly, before I could lose my nerve. “Why didn’t your mother and brother leave Sarajevo with you?”
    Sara froze. She had just popped a bit of cheese into her mouth, and she left it there, not even bothering to chew.
    “I’m sorry,” I said quickly. She clearly didn’t want to talk about it. “I didn’t mean to remind you of painful—”
    “You cannot remind me,” she interrupted. “I always thinking of them.”
    I understood what she meant. It was like when well-meaning people said, “Don’t worry about getting nervous and it won’t happen.” But the worry was always there, like a hungry dog, lurking in the shadows.
    “We all planned to leave on a special bus last November, organized by La Benevolencija,” Sara said slowly. “That is Jewish humanitarian society.”
    “Wait,” Felix interrupted. “A Jewish society? I thought you were Muslim.”
    “I am.”
    “But you don’t wear a headscarf?” I asked.
    “Not all Muslims wear headscarves.”
    “But why were you on a Jewish bus?” Felix asked.
    “Sarajevo Muslims helped Jews hide from the Nazis in World War II. Now they help us. The head of Jewish community, Ivan Ceresnjes, organized evacuations. Jewish buses were the safest way to leave Sarajevo. The airport was closed. Many Serbian checkpoints on the roads. But Jewish organization negotiated safe passage, so their buses got out.
    “Mama was lucky. She got three seats. Then, the night before we left, my little brother became very ill. High fever. He cannot walk. Too big to carry. Mama told me I must go alone. They come on the next bus, as soon as he is better.” She paused for a long while. “We did not know that would be the last bus.”
    “Did your brother get better?” I asked.
    “Yes. I get one letter. Only Grippe.”[SB231][KL232]
    “Flu,” Felix translated.
    “Flu,” Sara repeated. “All better. But bad timing. Very bad.”
    “So you took the bus to Vienna all alone?” I asked.
    Sara shook her head. “The bus took me to Croatia. I have a friend there from dance class. She had a cousin in Vienna. I took another bus here to stay with her. I applied for asylum; they said no. I received temporary protected status instead.”
    “What’s that?” I asked.
    “I allowed to stay but not work,” Sara explained. “But how can you live without work? My friend’s cousin cleaned offices. I worked with her for two months, at the newspaper office, where I met Katarina. I am bad at cleaning but good at languages. Katarina and I became friends. About a month ago, she invited me to come live with her.”
    Sara turned to look at me. “It is true what I say to the police, Becca. I not lie. Katarina explained she cannot pay me money, cannot hire me as au pair. But as friend, yes, she can help. And I can help her by watching you.”
    “What about your mom and brother?” I asked. “Why are you looking for them if you know they are still in Sarajevo?”
    Sara got very still. “I called them once from Croatia. Phone was disconnected after that. I sent them many letters, but I only received one. I have not received any since I moved in with Katarina. Maybe they found a way to leave. Maybe they are on their way to Vienna.”
    Or maybe they were dead.
    The beautiful day suddenly seemed wrong. Why were kids skipping by with ice cream and balloons when Sara’s family was missing?
    “How can you just sit there?” I yelled, suddenly irrationally angry. “How can you be so calm? I would be a mess. [SB233][KL234]I would be hysterical!”
    “How would that help?” Sara asked quietly.
    “I couldn’t do it,” I say. “I couldn’t stand it! All the worrying. I could never get on a bus by myself and travel across a war zone!”
    The more I yelled, the calmer Sara got. “Rebecca.” She was almost whispering now. “You are braver than you know.”
    I shook my head. “I can’t even get on a Ferris wheel.”
    She patted my back. “I was very scared too. But I knew I must get on the bus. And to help me be brave, I made a list of the things I want to do when the war is over. When I go back to Sarajevo.”
    Sara reached into her green pocketbook and pulled out a piece of paper. It was a simple lined sheet of notebook paper, as if ripped out of a school binder. There were five items listed on it, written in a language I didn’t understand.
    “What does it say?” Felix asked.
    Sara cleared her throat and translated. “Number one: Play violin recital.”
    “You play violin?” I asked.
    “Yes. Number two: Study languages at Uni.”
    “University,” Felix translated.
    “I not sure I smart enough, but I try.”
    “You speak six languages!” I said. “Of course you’re smart enough!”
    Sara blushed. “Number three: Perform ballroom dancing.”
    “Aha,” I said. “So that’s why you’re teaching that dance class with your friend!”
    She ignored me and kept reading. “Number four: Bake cake for brother.”
    I understood that one—I remembered her dream.
    “Number five: Get ice cream with family and walk across bridge.”
    I was quiet for a moment. It was a great list. Simple things. And yet . . . hard too.
    “I like lists,” I said finally. “The make me feel safe. They make me feel focused.”
    “Yes,” Sara agreed.
    “I want my own list,” I said. “Things I can do here in Austria.”
    “Like [JL235][KL236]go to concert? Go to museum?”
    “No,” I said. “I don’t want a sightseeing list. I want a list like yours! A list of things that are important to me. What if I make a list of things I’m scared of—so I can be brave and do them?” And then my dad won’t think of me as the girl who worries too much anymore.
    “Okay,” Sara said. “I help you with your list.”
    I got my Doomsday Journal out of my purse and pulled out a pen. What am I most afraid of? What do I want to do?
    “I don’t know,” Felix said as he bit into a peach. The sun had brought out the freckles on his nose, and his hair fell into his eyes. He pushed it back. “Sounds kind of weird to me. What are you going to put on your list—eat a soft-boiled egg or something?”
    “Yes!” I exclaimed. “That’s perfect.” In my careful, neat handwriting I wrote down, 1. [JL237][KL238]Eat a soft-boiled egg. And I immediately started to feel nervous. I mean, salmonella.
    “What?!” Felix asked. “I was joking.”
    But Sara smiled. “That good thing to start with. Not too hard.”
    Next I wrote, 2. [JL239][KL240]Learn to ride a bike.[JL241][KL242]
    “You don’t know how to ride a bike?” Felix marveled.
    “Hush, Felix,” Sara said. “You make a list next.”
    Felix rolled his eyes.
    I added 3, then stopped to think.
    “What else you scared of?” Sara coaxed.
    “Nuclear war,” I said. “Cancer. Zombies.”
    Felix laughed.
    “Car crashes, scorpions, large crowds.”
    “Crowds,” Sara repeated. “You mean large groups of people?”
    I nodded. “You could get trampled. You could get robbed. You could—"
    “Write that down,” she said.
    So I did. Hang out in a large crowd[KL245]. Then the next one came to me without effort: 4. Go on the Riesenrad.
    “I thought you hated Ferris wheels,” Felix said.
    “I’ve never been on one,” I admitted. “How do I know if I hate them or not?” I paused, chewing on the end of my pen as I thought of number five. I wanted something big. Something so large, I wasn’t sure I could do it. I slowly wrote down, 5. Travel somewhere.
    Felix peeked over my shoulder. “You’ve done that.”
    By myself, I added. “I mean, what if Dad stays here? Mom can’t come with me every time I want to visit.”
    Sara looked over my shoulder. “Good list.”
    “You’ll help me, right?”
    “Of course!”
    We grinned at each other.
    “Okay, Felix,” Sara said, turning to him. “You next.”
    “What? Me?” He shook his head. “I’m not scared of riding a bike or going on a plane or eating an egg.”
    Sara shrugged. “Everyone scared of different things.”
    “Well, I don’t have any fears,” Felix said.
    “All right,” Sara said, letting the matter drop. “Let us go see Gloriette.”
    The Gloriette was the fake Roman building on top of the hill behind the main palace. It was a long, hot walk in the sun, trudging up a switchback gravel path. But when we finally made it to the top, the view was beautiful. Bright-yellow Schönbrunn was in the foreground, and the rest of Vienna in the back. I could see St. Stephen’s and the green from all the parks, and off to one side, I even caught a glimpse of the Riesenrad.
    For a moment, I was so sad that I had missed it. But now . . . I had this list. Would it really help? 
    Dr. Teresa had once asked my mother to come up with a few examples of things I was afraid of. Dogs were on the list. The next week, Dr. Teresa wanted me to go pet her neighbor’s dog. I told her no. It might bite me. It might not have been vaccinated properly. It might have rabies! She said okay, then we could just look at it through the fence, but I refused to budge from her couch. She finally let it drop.
    But I was older now. And last year when my friend Chrissy got a dog, I had eventually learned to tolerate it. I guess it made more sense to me now what Dr. Teresa was trying to do. The thing was, Sara had actually lived through something awful. She was still living through horrible uncertainty now. And even though I knew she was worried, she still seemed to be enjoying the ice cream we had bought at the café on top of the hill, smiling as she licked her cone and looked out at the view.
    I wanted to be like her.

