 19
At the Heuriger
Felix’s party was scheduled for Sunday afternoon. The Heuriger reminded me a bit of a log cabin, with a bundle of twigs tied to the front door, wooden paneling, and long tables for people to share[JL264][KL265]. Katarina had reserved a spot on the back patio. She fluttered around like a monarch butterfly in her orange-and-black dress, calling out instructions to my dad, who arranged and rearranged the pitchers of new wine and sparkling juice until Katarina was satisfied. There were plates of cheeses and meats, and baskets of fresh bread on our table. Although I wouldn’t have said it to Felix, it seemed like a pretty nice place to have a party.
    All the kids we’d picked out had actually agreed to come. Katarina had called the families, told them it was Felix’s birthday, explained that I was visiting, and then invited their parents too. With my dad and me, Sara, a couple of Katarina’s friends, and our neighbor Frau Gamperl, it was going to be quite the little group. As we waited for them all to arrive, Felix paced from one side of the patio to the other. His mom had made him get a haircut, and he wore a new button-down shirt.
    Seeing him so anxious made me sad. I mean, I’d never met these kids before, but from their pictures, they seemed okay. And they’d agreed to come, so they obviously didn’t hate him. How bad could it be? But as I watched Felix fidget and twist his napkin, I realized he felt exactly like I had when I was facing down that happy egg.
    Daisy and Mai arrived first, their families walking in together. Daisy wore a jean skirt, a T-shirt, and sandals; Mai had on a dress covered in big sunflowers. Dad and Katarina welcomed them and pointed in our direction, but before they could move, Peter and his parents walked in.
    The grown-ups started chatting, and I turned to Felix. “Why aren’t any of your friends Austrian?” I asked.
    “I go to the International School,” he said. “It’s for the kids of diplomats and such. And they aren’t my friends anyway.”
    “But your mom’s not a diplomat.”
    “No, but she wanted me to be fluent in English.”
    The kids were all bunched up by the entrance to the patio. Rasheed had joined them. He was as short as Felix but talked a whole lot more. Both he and Peter were wearing soccer jerseys.
    Sara was taking the presents as people arrived and placing them on a table with the cake Katarina had baked the night before. (She’d had to do it twice. The first time she’d accidentally put in salt instead of sugar.) I caught Sara’s eye. She mouthed Help him and pointed to Felix.
    He had pulled out his Revolutionary War book and was huddled over it, as if it were a fire on a cold night. I realized if I didn’t do something, he’d probably leave his own party even more convinced that no one liked him. I couldn’t let that happen to him on his birthday.
    So I plucked the book from his hand and threw it under the table. “Come on,” I said, pulling him up. “I need you to introduce me to the other kids.”
    “You already know their names,” he said.
    I dragged him across the room. Daisy and Mai were chattering loudly in a language that definitely wasn’t German. “That sounds like French,” I said.
    “That’s because it is French,” Felix mumbled[JL267][KL268].
    “I thought you spoke German and English at school?” I asked.
    “Yeah,” he said. “But Daisy’s grandmother lives in Paris, and Mai has an aunt in Switzerland.”
    “They each speak three languages?”
    “No,” Felix said. “Mai and Peter speak four.”
    We didn’t even start a language until eighth grade. Guess I was a little behind. I kept waiting to freak out myself. I mean, social situations don’t usually upset me, but it’s happened before. (There was that time at the fifth-grade Halloween party of which we will not speak.) But there was something about helping Felix that kept me calm. Like I had a bigger purpose. Besides, who cared if the others didn’t like me—I’d probably never see them again. But Felix would.
    The four kids were clumped together in a corner as we approached. “Hi,” I said loudly. “I’m Becca.”
    The conversation stopped, and they all turned to look at me. Okay, so my heart did start beating faster then. Beside me, Felix was staring at the floor and trembling, so I knew he felt even worse.
    “My dad is dating Felix’s mom, so that makes him and me like . . . friends.” Okay, so that was probably the stupidest thing I could say.
    “You’re the American,” [SB269][KL270]Peter said doubtfully, in a thick British accent.
    “Yup,” I admitted. “How’d you know? I didn’t even bring my horse and cowboy hat.” Nope, that was even stupider.
    But Daisy burst out laughing. “Becca, you are so funny! And you have the cutest accent.”
    Me? They were the ones who all spoke English like they were on Masterpiece Theatre.
    “I’m Daisy,” she continued. “This is Peter, Mai, and Rasheed.”
    “Nice to meet you,” I said. “I’m Becca and this is Felix.”
    They all laughed again, even Felix.
    “Hi,” Felix whispered to the ground.
    “Come on,” I said. “Let’s go get some food.”
    We sat down at the table Katarina had reserved. Peter poured everyone a glass of the grape juice. We talked about movies. And the Statue of Liberty. Rasheed and Mai had been; I had not. Daisy wanted to go see the Hollywood Walk of Fame. I told them about how last summer, my mom had taken me on a covered-wagon trip where we pretended to be cowgirls. “Wow.” Peter said. “I thought you were kidding about the horse.”
    I laughed. When the girls went to the bathroom and the boys went to get some more food, I nudged Felix. “They’re nice!” I said.
    “I can never think of anything to say,” Felix grumbled.
    “But you’re a good listener!” I pointed out. “That’s an undervalued skill.”
    Felix didn’t look convinced.
    By the time the others returned, it was time for cake. Dad and I sneaked off to a side room to light the candles. We had bought Felix some frog candles, since he still teased me about those pajamas. I couldn’t believe I’d already been in Austria for three weeks. Sara got out her violin and played along as everybody sang “Happy Birthday.”
    Felix smiled when he saw the candles on the cake.
    “Make a wish!” Katarina cried out.
Felix closed his eyes and made his wish[JL273][KL274]. H    e blew, we clapped, and while Katarina cut the cake, Sara played songs on the violin. She was really good. Frau Gamperl tapped her foot in approval, and the owner of the Heuriger actually came over to listen. He disappeared for a moment and then returned carrying an accordion. He said something to Sara, she nodded, and then they launched into a folk song, which apparently everyone knew (except for me and my father[SB276][KL277]), because they all started singing along in German.
    It was super weird.
    And kind of cool too.
    I sat and ate my cake. Felix didn’t reach for his book again, but he still stayed close by my side. Daisy tried to get the other boys to do some traditional dance with her. Mai started laughing hysterically as Daisy spun Peter around and around in circles. Rasheed told a long, boring story about his favorite football team, and Felix listed so intently and politely, for a minute I thought he was actually interested. When Sara and the owner started playing the chicken-dance song, we all stood up and flapped our “wings,” as if we were, well, some of those happy chickens.
    After the song, I threw myself down into a chair and poured myself another glass of juice. Katarina was standing behind me and talking to a woman who sounded familiar, though I couldn’t quite place her. Grown-up conversation isn’t usually that interesting, so I pretty much ignored them, until I felt a tap on my shoulder and turned around.
    It was the journalist I’d talked to on the plane.

