 31
Drinks on a Train
The next morning, Dad and Katarina were long gone by the time the rest of us woke up. Sara, Felix, and I got to the station an hour before our departure time, so we had plenty of time to buy sandwiches for lunch and pick out a bunch of postcards. The train wasn’t full, so we had a compartment to ourselves. Sara and Felix pulled out the seats and pushed them together to make a little bed. We were all lying flat on our backs as if we were in a sleeper, giggling, when the train pulled out of the station.
    “Let’s call Mai and Rasheed when we get home,” I suggested. “Maybe they’d like to go see the opera movie at the Rathaus tomorrow.”
    Felix made a face.
    “What?” I asked.
    “You want me to tell you all the things wrong with that plan?”
    “You like Mai and Rasheed!” I pointed out.
    “Yes, but . . .”
    The Czech conductor came by to check our tickets. Sara showed them to him[JL446][KL447], then tucked them back into her green purse. Once he was gone, Felix and I continued our discussion. “I’m trying to make more friends at school, Becca,” he argued. “I can’t invite them to some lame event full of grandmas and tourists!”
    “It looks fun!” I insisted. “And you liked that opera!”
    “No, I didn’t,” said Felix.
    “Yes, you did!”
    “Kinder!” Sara interrupted. “Time for lunch. Let’s get drinks from the café car.”
    “Fine,” Felix said. “I’ll stay here and watch the bags.”
    Which meant I had to go help carry the drinks. I wobbled a bit walking down the corridor. Why is Felix still so hesitant to make new friends? It’s sort of annoying. When we got to the end of the car, Sara pushed a big metal button, and the door slid open. In the space between the cars, the train tracks whizzed by beneath our feet. I stood still, watching for a long moment. What if I fall?
    “Gap is too small,” Sara said, as if she had read my mind. “Come.” She tugged at my hand, and automatically I stepped over the gap. I felt a little dizzy, but Sara kept walking and I followed her. There was a second door to open, followed by a second gap to jump. This time, I didn’t look down and it wasn’t quite as scary.
    Finally, we reached the café car. Instead of compartments, this car had little booths by the windows and a bar serving drinks. Sara ordered a Coke (for me), an Almdudler (for Felix), and einen kleinen Braunen (coffee with milk) for herself. The sodas came in glass bottles. I watched as the saleswoman popped off the bottle caps before handing them carefully to me. Sara paid with money from my dad’s envelope and put the change back into her [SB448]purse. Then she picked up her coffee.
    “Becca, you get door,” she instructed. “Be brave. Jump over quick.”
    I had just opened the door between the cars when a small child of five or six came barreling through the passageway and ran right into me. We both fell to the floor, knocking Sara down as well.
    The drinks flew everywhere. Coffee stained the front of Sara’s shirt; the sodas missed me but spilled onto the table of an elderly woman sitting in a booth by the window. “Ach du meine Güte!” exclaimed the woman, standing up to avoid getting wet.
    “I’m so sorry!” The boy’s mother came forward. She spoke English with a thick accent. She jerked the boy by the arm and handed him off to a man who was standing behind her. “I tell him not to run.”
    Sara pressed a handful of napkins to her shirt as the boy’s mother and I grabbed some paper towels and helped the old woman mop up the mess. The soda was all over her table, soaking into her newspaper. She folded it into soggy squares and threw it into the trash.
    The child came back again, running into his mother this time. His mother grasped his wrist hard. “Nein!” she snapped at him. “My apologies. I pay for drinks.” She threw down a hundred-schilling bill and marched the boy off.
    We finished wiping down the table for the old lady. Sara exchanged a few words with her in German. The woman shook her head. “Nein, danke,” she said. “Bin schon fertig.”
    “What’d she say?” I asked.
    “I asked if she wanted another newspaper. She said no, she was already done.”
    “That’s lucky,” I said. “But your shirt’s all stained!”
    Sara shrugged. “I have a clean shirt in my bag. Let’s get new drinks now.”
    We waited in line—again—and used the hundred-schilling bill to pay. I opened the doors more carefully this time, and we made it back to our compartment.
    Felix had slid the seats back into their normal positions and gotten out our bag of sandwiches. “What happened to you?” he asked, gesturing to Sara’s shirt.
    “A little boy ran into me,” Sara said, shaking her head. “Very naughty.”
    I handed Felix his Almdudler and took a sip of my Coke.
    “Sandwich?” Felix asked gruffly.
    “Sure.” He tossed me my ham and swiss on a baguette. Fine. If he wanted to be grumpy, I’d just write a few postcards.
    Sara sat down and took a long sip of her coffee. Then suddenly, she jumped up. “Where’s my purse?” she asked.
    “What?” I asked.
    “My purse.”
    “You had it in the café car,” I said.
    “Maybe I drop it,” she sighed and put her coffee down on a little ledge. “Stay here. I go look. Be right back.”
    “Okay.”
    Felix and I ate our sandwiches in silence. After a few minutes, the train slowly came to a stop. “Are we at the border already?” I asked.
    “I guess,” he said.
    “Where’s Sara?” I asked. “Doesn’t she have to be here?”
    “No,” he said. “They can just check her passport in the café car.”
    “I’d rather go get—”
    At that moment the door to our car slid open. “Pässe bitte. Passports, please.”
    Felix and I dug our passports out of our backpacks and handed them over.
    “Traveling alone?” the conductor asked me, opening my passport.
    “No,” I said, my heart beating just a little too fast. “Our au . . . friend went to the café car.”
    He nodded and glanced at Felix’s passport before handing them both back to us. “Gute Reise!”
    Then he closed the door and was gone.
    Felix picked up his sandwich again, but my stomach was churning. I wished Felix would talk to me. I’d never thought I’d have to go through passport control by myself. It hadn’t been that bad, but I would have been less anxious if Sara had been there. Wait a minute . . .
    “Where’s Sara?” I asked.
    “She went to the café car.”
    “It’s been a while,” I said.
    Felix shrugged. “Maybe she had to stop by the restroom on the way back.”
    “Maybe.”
    The train jerked and started moving again. Felix pulled out a book, but he didn’t open it. I tried to focus on my postcards, but I kept glancing at my watch. Five minutes crept by. Then ten. Then fifteen.
    “I’m going to go look for her,” I said.
    “She told us to stay here.”
    “You stay here in case she comes back.”
    “Fine!”
    I wasn’t sure what we were arguing about anymore. I picked up my purse and put my hand on the door.
    “Becca?” Felix said more gently.
    “What?”
    “She’s probably just in the bathroom. Right?”
    “Sure,” I said.
    I left and started walking quickly. I’m known for overreacting, aren’t I? I mean, her shirt was covered in coffee. She probably stopped to wash it out. But my heart thumped in time with the clatter of the train on the tracks. Sara would not have left us alone for so long unless . . .
    Something’s wrong. Something’s wrong.

