 34
Waiting
Felix and I sat by the phone all day Tuesday and Wednesday, but Sara never called. On Thursday, Frau Gamperl announced she was going to take us into the city to visit the Hofburg. I knew she was trying to distract us from worrying about Sara. The Hofburg was the winter residence of the Hapsburgs. Like the castle in Prague, it had lots of rooms and tapestries and blah, blah, blah. We’d missed the 9:00 a.m. English-language tour, and there wasn’t another one until 2:00 p.m., so we did the German one instead. Felix translated the important bits, half-heartedly. Everything time I saw a funny painting or a cool piece of jewelry, I turned to point it out to Sara, forgetting again and again that she wasn’t there.
    After the tour, we walked around Heldenplatz, the big open space in front of the Hofburg. “This is where Hitler gave his infamous speech when he marched into Austria.” Frau Gamperl pointed. “He spoke from that balcony right over there.”
    It was hard to imagine. The plaza was fairly empty and peaceful. But fifty-five years ago it had been filled with Nazis. I shivered. We sat down at the base of a large statue, a man on a horse who was holding a rolled-up flag in one hand.
    “In [JL490][KL491]1938, right?” Felix asked.
    “Yes.”
    “How old were you?” I asked.
    “I was sixteen when Hitler marched into Vienna,” Frau Gamperl said. “I spent much of the next seven years passing what information I could on to the English. My English was always very good.”
    “You were a spy?” Felix asked.
    “I like to think I was a good citizen. Part of the Austrian resistance.”
    “What?!” Felix exclaimed. “You were part of the O5?”
    “Yes,” she said. “I’m surprised you’ve heard of us.”
    “I like history,” Felix said.
    “There was only a small group of us. But we did what we could. I helped a few families escape when it was still possible. One night, we painted our slogan all across Vienna!”
    “Did you paint the symbol on Stephansdom?” Felix asked.
    “No. But one of my friends did,” she said with a grin. “That was a long time ago.” She stared at the Hofburg.
    “What happened after the war?” I asked.
    “I was twenty-three. I married an English officer—he was part of the Allied forces occupying Vienna after the war. He loved the city and we settled here. He died when the kids were small, of a heart attack, and for many years I was too busy to worry about anything except getting the next meal on the table. But now my kids have [JL492][KL493]grown up and moved on with their own lives. I spend most of my time now discussing politics and planting flowers in my garden.”
    Okay. Gotta admit. Old lady spy living next door to my father was not what I expected. She’d seemed so dull and old-fashioned, and yet there she was, telling us about sneaking information to the English. She’d been brave. Like Sara.
    “You’re coming to the Lichtermeer, right?” Frau Gamperl asked. “It’s on Saturday.”
    “What’s that?” I asked.
    “The march against Haider’s petition,” Felix explained.
    “Oh yeah, definitely!” I said. “But why did you call it a Lichtermeer?”
    “Literally it means sea of lights. Everyone is supposed to bring a candle and light it when the march starts. There are going to be speeches all over the city, speaking out against the hatred of foreigners. And the center is going to be right here, at Heldenplatz, where Hitler gave his own hate-filled speech.”
    I looked around the plaza, trying to imagine it full of people. I knew I wanted to be part of the sea of lights.
***
On Friday, Felix and I rode our bikes to dance class. This was our fourth class, and I was getting pretty good at both dancing and riding my bike. But it didn’t feel right without Sara there. Katarina had called the dance studio and left a message, but I guess Marco hadn’t gotten it, because he came up to us as soon as we arrived. “Where’s Sara?” he asked. We had to try to explain what had happened, right there in the waiting room. Marco got stiller and stiller until his face looked like a marble statue. “Missing?” he asked. “I not understand.”
    But it was time for class then, and we couldn’t talk anymore. Frau Kovács had to demonstrate the steps herself, and she scowled the whole time. She even snapped at Marco when he accidentally messed up. Mai showed up late, and Daisy and Peter both had a cold, so they didn’t come at all. Even Felix [KL495]stepped on my foot three times. I tried really hard not to yelp, but the last time it hurt! “Sorry,” he mumbled miserably.
    Yeah. That’s how I felt too.
    Felix, Rasheed, Mai, and I went to Giovanni’s Gelato after class, but even ice cream didn’t cheer me up this time. No one had much to say. “Is anyone else going to the Lichtermeer tomorrow?” I asked.
    “Definitely,” said Rasheed. “My dad is from India. He was here legally and met my mom at university. But even though my mom’s Austrian, I was born here, and German is my first language, sometimes when I’m out with my father, people yell at us and tell us to go back home. So yeah, we will be there.”
    Mai wanted to go too, so we all made plans to meet in front of Felix’s house the next evening. As we were finishing our ice cream, I heard Mai say to Felix, “You were so brave.”
    “No, I wasn’t,” Felix said. “In fact, I was terrified.”
    “Maybe,” Mai said. “But you still made it back to Vienna.”
    Riding home, I kept thinking about what Mai had said. I’d always thought that I needed to be brave before I could do stuff, but maybe I had it backward. Maybe being brave was about doing things—getting on the bike or stepping onto the dance floor or boarding a plane—and the feeling of confidence came after.
    In any case, as we put our bikes back into the storage room, I realized I’d been so preoccupied with the definition of bravery that I’d forgotten to worry about falling off my bike.

