 35
Das Lichtermeer
The next evening, Saturday, August 21, we all met in front of Felix’s house: Katarina, Felix, Dad, me, and Frau Gamperl. Rasheed and his folks joined us too. I was expecting the Kumars and Mai’s family, but Peter and his parents and two little brothers also showed up, as well as Daisy, her mom, her dad, and an older sister.
    Dad pulled me aside before we left. “Becca,” he warned. “I probably don’t need to say this, but they are expecting huge crowds. There’s going to be no way to get out if you get scared.”
    “I still want to go,” I said.
    “Okay,” Dad said. “But what if I get nervous?”
    We both smiled. The streetcar was crowded, and I noticed other groups like ours. It was almost festive, like the Fourth of July (which, of course, they did not celebrate in Austria). When we got off at Schottentor, the streets were already packed. “Streetcar number one [JL499][KL500]isn’t running,” Katarina said. “There are so many people, they are blocking the rails. We’ll have to walk to Heldenplatz.”
    I glanced over at Frau Gamperl.
    “I’m not that old,” she snapped. “For this, I can walk.”
    The crowd got thicker as we walked. Dad and Katarina stuck close to Felix and me, as if they were scared to let us out of their sight even for a moment. By the time we reached Heldenplatz, it was so crowded, it was hard to move. Katarina flashed a press pass, and we all squeezed forward, into another section.
    I gotta admit—I felt a little uncomfortable. Not because it was hot and I was thirsty (which I was) but because there were no easily accessible exits. What if someone has a stink bomb? Or tear gas? Or a gun? But every time I felt like giving up and running away, I touched the little green bag I wore across my body. I’d stitched the leather straps back together. It wasn’t pretty, but it held. Inside, I had my Monatskarte, some money, and Sara’s list.
    Finally, we found a spot to stand, not far from the statue where Felix, Frau Gamperl, and I had talked two days before. Dad pulled a package of long white candles from his backpack and handed them out, one for each of us. Katarina had brought small paper plates with a hole cut in the middle of each and showed us how to pull them down over the candles to protect our fingers from the dripping wax. Frau Kumar passed out matches—from the Heuriger where we’d had Felix’s birthday. There was a light wind, and Daisy’s and Peter’s candles kept going out, but mine burned strong and clear. I helped the others light theirs, until they were all burning.
    We were surrounded by people. Everyone seemed tall, giant-sized, and I could barely see a thing. We were crammed in so close together, I almost set a woman’s long blond hair on fire. Another man had a jacket that brushed through my flame. I cupped my hand around the candle and held it closer. A drop of hot wax dripped from the plate onto my hand.
    Will it leave a scar? What if I burn myself? Dad had my first aid kit in his backpack, but it was so crowded, I wasn’t sure I’d be able to pull it out. I didn’t like being jostled and squished. What if people start to panic? Or riot? I had a section in Doomsday Journal #3 about how to avoid getting injured by a stampeding crowd, but I couldn’t remember what it said to do. I started to shiver, even though it was a warm night.
    “You okay, Becca?” Felix asked softly.
    I shook my head. I held on to the candle with both hands, as if for dear life. I will not panic now. I will not. I focused on the flame as it burned bright and clear. Sara. Sara. Think about Sara.
    Felix stood on one side of me, and Dad somehow appeared on the other. I could see Ms. Madden with her camera crew on a platform near the speaker. She turned and scanned the crowd. Katarina waved dramatically, and Ms. Madden waved back at us. I felt a little better.
    The first speaker began his speech, and I started to forget about being squished together like sardines. No . . . like bugs in a jar of paprika. Felix translated for me, whispering into my ear.
    [NOTE from author: There are quotes from actual speeches—how do I get permission to use? They are from the book, Land im Lichtermeer: Stimmen Gegen Fremdenfeinlichkeit, Picus Verlag Wien. I translated from the German.][JL501][SB502]
    “We can’t isolate ourselves; we can’t close our eyes and ears from what is going on around us,” the first man said. “We don’t have a foreigner problem; there is only a problem between poor and rich, because no one has anything against rich foreigners. We must give the poor, the socially vulnerable in Austria the feeling that they are not worthless, regardless of whether or not they are citizens. That is the greatest goal.”
    A clergyman spoke next: “The belief in Jesus Christ and the hatred of foreigners are incompatible. Loving our neighbors knows no boundaries. Like Martin Luther King with his dream of a society where the color of your skin does not decide whether people have rights or not. Like this dream, we want to have equal rights for all people living here, regardless of race, religion, political beliefs, social class, and also independent of place of birth.”
    “We reject Mr. Haider’s point of view,” continued a member of parliament. “The truth is, his petition makes only one thing certain—that it will rile up emotions and leave our problems unsolved. Many sectors of our economy would cease to function if we no longer had any foreign workers.”
    Another government official went on: “We were happy here, on this side of the Iron Curtain, but we knew that on the other side of the border, our neighbors thought of our land as a harbor for refugees and hope. People are demonstrating tonight not for their own rights and privileges but for the rights of others.”
    “I don’t believe that the lot of the unemployed in Austria can make us blind to the fact that outside of our borders, millions struggle simply to survive,” a bishop told the group. “I don’t believe that the majority of Austrians can take offense when there are problems in the schools with students who don’t speak perfect German, and yet remain unmoved when children in other places are slashed apart by grenades.
    “I simply don’t believe that seeing Muslim women in their strange-to-us clothing irritates us more than the fact that in Bosnia thousands of Muslim women and girls are defiled, raped, mutilated, and killed.
    “There are situations in which lines must be drawn. Staying quiet, observing, looking away, that may be more comfortable. But when the minority is threatened, the majority must show that they are ready to take them into their protection, to build a wall of people around them.
    “I don’t know how many Austrians will sign the Austria First petition. But I am certain that the majority of Austrians think differently. That for this majority, solidarity with people in need is not an empty phrase.”
    I thought again about The Sound of Music. About how the captain and Maria and the children sang “Edelweiss” at the music festival and how the other performers covered for them, extending their bows so they’d have a couple of extra minutes to get away. I thought about the nuns taking the spark plugs out of the Nazis’ cars so they couldn’t follow the von Trapp family up into the hills.
    Is that what we’re doing tonight? Nothing that seems very big. Nothing irreversible. Just for one night, taking the spark plugs out of a car.
    I suddenly saw the beauty of the evening, the thousands of candles twinkling in the darkness. The people there were saying no, one politician and his followers did not represent who they were as a country. Did not represent who they wanted to be.
    Yeah. I think a few less spark plugs could make a difference.

