 39
At the Ball
We spent most of Saturday getting ready for the ball. Katarina was wearing a rich-red[JL542][KL543] gown, and her hair was piled in an updo, with dark curls falling onto her forehead and neck. She looked amazing. For me, she’d found a purple dress she thought would suit me in the back of her closet. I spent Saturday afternoon standing on a box in her bedroom while she tucked and pinned and hemmed.
    “So . . . a ball is basically a big prom for grown-ups?” I asked.[SB544][KL545]
Katarina laughed. “Something like that. Most balls are held in the winter,” she explained. “It’s Vienna’s version of Carnival. Kids are usually strictly verboten, but since this is a student ball—and the dance studio helped organize it—your class is being allowed to go. Sara’s gone early to get ready to perform.     We’ll meet her there.”[SB548][KL549]
    Katarina made one final adjustment to my skirt. “Done. Take a look!”
    I stepped down off the box and turned toward her mirror. The purple dress had a tight bodice and lace over the shoulders and sleeves. The skirt was full and flew out when I twirled. I had a petticoat underneath, and Katarina had found me a pair of high-heeled shoes. (They were low-heeled high heels, because shoes that are too high are very bad for the tendons in your feet. See DJ #3, p. 31.) [SB551][KL552]In any case, the dress made me feel like I had walked into a fancy party on Love on the Evening Tide. 
    “I love it!”
    My dad took Felix to rent a tuxedo, and the two of them got more into it than I’d expected, coming home talking cummerbunds and cuff links. Even Sara’s mother was coming, in another borrowed dress from Katarina, this one black and long and elegant. Eldin was way too young to come (and he’d probably break something), but Frau Gamperl had volunteered to watch him. “I’ve been to plenty of balls in my time,” she said. “But you all have fun!”
    The ball was being held at the University of Vienna, in [JL553][KL554]a massive [SB555]building that looked more like a palace than a school to me. We showed our tickets at the door and were waved through a hallway into a courtyard surrounded by curved archways on all four sides. A wooden dance floor had been laid out over the stones of the patio.
    Sara and Marco came over almost as soon as we arrived. “You made it!” she cried. Sara looked beautiful. Her dress was white and as light and fluffy as a vanilla cupcake. She even had a tiny tiara sparkling on her head, right where her green streak should have been.
    “It’s gone!” I exclaimed.
    “Yeah.” Sara touched her hair gingerly, as if she could feel the change in color. “Mama is here.” 
    Mrs. Tahirović smiled and kissed her on both cheeks. Katarina snapped a picture of them together, one all in white, the other all in black.
    Marco wore a white tie and tails—he even had white gloves—and looked like he’d stepped out of Masterpiece Theatre. He bowed and kissed Mrs. Tahirovic’s [SB556][KL557]hand, making us all laugh.
    “We must go,” Sara said. “Meet you after opening!”
    Rasheed, Mai, and their parents joined us next.
    “Hey,” I said to Rasheed. “Looking sharp.”
    Rasheed pulled at his collar and muttered, “This thing is so uncomfortable.”
    Felix laughed. “Becca’s dad took me for a professional fitting.”
    “That’s why your tux looks so nice,” Mai said.
    I thought Felix was going to faint. Luckily, he was saved from having to respond, because at that moment, eight trumpeters appeared, poking their instruments out of the second-story windows, two on each side of the courtyard. A hush fell over the crowd.
    They played a fanfare. A real gosh-darn-it fanfare, like we were in a movie. The orchestra, tucked away in a corner of the courtyard, started to play. The young women and men opening the ball stepped two by two onto the dance floor, then they joined together to march four by four, then eight by eight, and finally they made a circle around the courtyard. It took me a minute to find Sara in the sea of white dresses. 
    The trumpets played another fanfare, and then the orchestra played the first measures of a waltz. I couldn’t take my eyes off Sara and Marco as they spun around the courtyard. The dresses swirled out like little tulle tornadoes. They seemed to float across the floor.
    When the song was finally done, they all bowed, and a man in tails came onto the floor and called out “Alles Walzer!” 
    Immediately, people rushed onto the dance floor as the band started another song. Dad held his hand out to Katarina and asked, “May I have this dance?”
    The rest of us stood awkwardly in a group for a moment. I was waiting for Felix to ask Mai to dance, but of course he didn’t. “Hey, Rasheed,” I said. “You want to try out some of those steps we learned in class?”
    “Sure!”
    Mai got the hint. “Felix, would you like to dance?” He nodded[JL561][KL562], and the four of us walked out onto the dance floor. “Ouch!” I exclaimed as Rasheed promptly stepped on my foot.
    “Sorry,” he called out cheerfully. “Just like in class.”
    The dance floor was packed. Back in the United States, I’d only ever seen old people waltzing, maybe at a wedding or a stuffy restaurant. But most of the couples here were Sara’s age, and they zipped across the floor, spinning like tops. It was actually kind of hard to avoid them. Felt a bit like dodgeball in gym class.
    “Ouch!” I exclaimed again.
    “Oops!” said Rasheed with such a goofy grin, it made me giggle.
    I stepped on his foot—on purpose. Then he stepped on mine, and it turned into sort of a game. A couple who totally weren’t paying attention to where they were waltzing ran into us. They yelled at us in German, and we burst out laughing.
    “Come on,” I said to the others. “Let’s go explore!”
    The orchestra in the courtyard was playing traditional music—waltzes, polkas, and tangos. We found another band in a smaller hall playing rock and roll. Felix, Rasheed, Mai, and I watched for a while, smiling at the Austrians in formalwear dancing the jitterbug. “They are so good,” I marveled.
    There was another room with a disco ball [SB563][KL564]and a DJ, and yet another with a magician doing magic tricks while people in ball gowns plopped down on the floor to watch. After a couple of magic tricks, we got up to explore some more and ran into Sara, Mrs. Tahirović, and Marco in the hallway.
    “You were amazing!” I gushed to Sara.
    Marco squeezed her hand.
    “Did you see the magician?” I asked. “He’s great!”
    “No, we were just on our way to—”
    At that moment, a waiter carrying a tray of drinks collided with a couple dancing their way out of one of the ballrooms. The glasses fell to the floor with a spectacular crash. Someone screamed.
    Almost before the glasses had finished tinkling to the floor, two more waiters descended on the scene with brooms and a dustpan. Clearly, they were prepared for this, because a minute later, all signs of the accident had been erased, except for a small wet patch from the spilled drinks on the stone floor.
    But someone was still crying out, as if in pain, as if they’d been hurt. I turned around and realized it was Mrs. Tahirović, her hands protectively covering her face. She was sobbing.[JL565][KL566]
    “Mama! Mama!” Sara [KL568]called.
    “Was ist los?” asked Marco.
    “What’s wrong?” I repeated in English.
    Mai and Rasheed made a little wall, trying to block her from the view of the others passing by in the corridor.[JL569][KL570]
    “Did she get hit by a piece of flying glass?” asked Felix.
    “I do not think so,” Sara said. She and her mother had a brief, terse exchange in Bosnian. “The glass breaking reminded her of something that happened in Sarajevo.”
    “Let’s get her outside,” said Marco.
    Our little procession led Mrs. Tahirović down the stairs and into a side garden just off the courtyard. It was a warm evening but much less stuffy outside than it had been in the crowded building. We found a secluded bench in one corner. Mrs. Tahirović sat down, and Sara put her arms around her mother. Mrs. Tahirović’s mascara ran down her face, leaving a gray smudge on the shoulder of Sara’s white gown.
    “Could someone get some water?” Sara asked. “And find Katarina?”
    “I get the water,” said Marco.
    “We’ll find Katarina,” said Mai, pulling Rasheed away with her.
    Felix and I stood awkwardly [SB571][KL572]nearby, unsure if we should leave or stay.
    Sara gripped her mother’s hands and began to plead with her in Bosnian. I didn’t understand a word, and yet somehow I knew she was asking her mother again and again to please tell her why she was upset.
    Finally, Mrs. Tahirović began to speak. I couldn’t understand her either, of course, but she spoke slowly and deliberately. Sara was crying, with silent tears running down her face.
    Dad and Katarina ran up then. “What’s happened?” Katarina asked.
    Felix spoke softly. “A waiter dropped a tray of glasses, and Mrs. Tahirović starting crying.”
    Marco came back with a glass of water and handed it to [KL575]Sara’s mother. She drank it in one gulp.
    Mrs. Tahirović spoke again, then looked at her daughter to translate. “My mother apologizes for making a scene,” Sara said in almost a monotone. “The glass breaking reminded her of . . . an incident back home.”
    “It’s all right,” said Katarina kindly. “Why, anyone could get startled!”
    Sara translated again, and Mrs. Tahirović smiled weakly.
    “Let’s take your mother to the restroom,” Katarina suggested. “She can wash her face, and she’ll feel much better.”
    Sara translated, Mrs. Tahirović nodded, and the three of them walked off.
    Dad, Felix, and I watched them go. Marco picked up the water glass and went to return it to the bar. I looked around.
    No one was paying us any mind. A group of young women giggled as they walked by. A couple argued loudly in German. I couldn’t tell what they were saying, but everyone ignored them too. Mrs. Tahirović had freaked out in a group, in public. The thing I had always feared. The fear that had kept me from fireworks and musicals—and yet nothing had happened. We’d had a good time before she’d gotten upset; could we even have a good time after?
    I looked over at Felix. “What do we do now?”
    He shook his head uncertainly.
    “I think,” Dad said slowly, “we should go to the disco.”
    So we did. The DJ was playing “Y.M.C.A.” I knew a bunch of people on the dance floor: Daisy, Peter, and their parents had shown up. Even the stern Frau Kovács was waving her arms in the air. Mai, Rasheed, and Marco joined us. We walked out onto the dance floor. The others welcomed us into their little circle, and we all jumped up and down and waved our arms and called out “Y-M-C-A” together, pronouncing the letters with a German accent. I’m not sure I’ve ever laughed so hard.
    When we tired of dancing, we wandered back to the courtyard. It was almost midnight. Waiters were handing out bubbly drinks in tall glass flutes. Dad, Marco, and Felix went to get some. I spotted Katarina, Sara, and Mrs. Tahirović sitting on a stone bench in a little alcove.
    “Becca!” Katarina called out. “We are having a lovely time watching all the dancers.” She jumped up, her red dress swirling like a rose in the wind. “Sit here, sit here. I’ll get us some Sekt for our toast!”
    I sat down next to Sara. Mrs. Tahirović looked better—still pale and wan, but she wasn’t shaking anymore. “Everything okay?” I asked.
    Sara squeezed my hand. “Mama started talking to me,” she whispered into my ear.
    Dad, Katarina, Felix, and Marco joined us, passing out glasses until we all had one. An old bell started to toll. Everyone cheered, and Dad and Katarina called out, “Prost!” We all clinked glasses and took a sip.
    It was sweet and fruity. The bubbles tingled on my tongue. It tasted like a liquid flower, not like any sparkling cider I had ever . . .
    “It’s champagne!” I held the glass away from my body.
    “Yes,” Dad said.
    I made a face and everyone laughed. Even me.
    The ball was wrapping up, so the grown-ups paired off for one final dance.
    “Felix?” I asked.
    “What?”
    “Would you like to dance?”
    “Sure,” he said. “Why not.”
    I took his arm like they’d shown us in class, and he led me out onto the floor. We had a fabulous time, stepping on each other’s toes and laughing every time we messed up. “I’m so glad I came,” I said.
    “To the ball? To dance class? To Austria?” Felix asked.
    “All of it,” I said.
    “Yeah,” he agreed. “Me too.”
***
An old man in tails stood by the exit. “Fräulein!” he called out to me as I walked by. “Ihre Damenspende.”
    He handed me a gift bag with a little black box inside.
    “What’s this?” Dad asked.
    “There’s always a gift for the women at a ball,” Katarina told him, taking her own bag. “Ooh, it’s perfume!”
    Sara walked arm in arm with her mother. Mrs. Tahirović opened her box and pulled out a little bottle of light-yellow liquid.
    “Spellbound,” I read off the side.
    Mrs. Tahirović sprayed a bit of the perfume in the air. It was spicy and sweet.
    Felix sneezed. “Magical.” He sneezed again.
    “Do you want to get a taxi?” Dad asked.
    “No,” Katarina said. “Let’s take the night bus.”
    We all walked to the bus stop. There was a crowd of people waiting, all wearing tuxedos and ball gowns. Marco’s bus came first. He hugged everyone and kissed Mrs. Tahirović’s hand again before he left. Our bus finally came, and everyone filed orderly onboard. No one checked our bus passes.
    Katarina and Mrs. Tahirović sat in the front of the bus. Felix and Dad found a seat behind them. Sara and I sat across the aisle.
    “Sara,” I said. “I just thought of something. What was the first item on your list?”
    “Play violin recital,” Sara replied. “Why?”
    “You did that at my birthday,” Felix commented.
    “And two?” I asked.
    “Study language at Uni.”
    “You did that with Marco,” I pointed out.
    “Ballroom dancing was on the list too,” Felix added. “I remember because I thought, No way!”
    “I did that tonight,” Sara mused.
    “And Eldin got his cake! But I can’t remember number five.”
    “It was,” Sara said slowly, “‘get ice cream with family and walk across bridge.’”
    “We did that in Prague!” exclaimed Felix.
    “Now you’ve completed your list too!”
    Sara looked thoughtful for a long moment. Her eyes got so big and watery I thought her mascara was going to start running down her cheeks like her mother’s had done. But instead of crying, she broke into a grin. “Yes,” she said finally. “I guess I have.”
    By the time we got home, my feet hurt and I had a blister. But for once, I didn’t worry about applying antibiotic cream or taking a shower after being in a large group of people. I just tumbled happily into bed and fell asleep.

