 10 – THE CAVE

      Emma sure wasn’t like no other girl I’d ever met.  She told me about museums she had visited in Boston and had a set of paints like a real artist.  Emma didn’t approve of sneaking into places, unless it was the Negra church so she could play the organ.  She used to have piano lessons at her school in Boston, and had a book of songs by people like Bach and Mozart.  She said they were from far away places like Germany and Australia.  I pointed out that we were at war with Germany and she shouldn’t aid the enemy by playing their music.  “How is playing their music going to aid them?”  Emma asked.  I didn’t have no answer, and the music was kind of pretty, so I just sat back and listened.  
      It’s not like Emma knew everything.  In some ways, she was plumb stupid.  She had never built a fort or played hide-and-seek in the woods.  When we decided to dig a secret hideout in one of the mounds, I had to show her everything.
      We weren’t working two minutes ‘til Emma started complaining.  “I’m getting blisters,” she said.  The shovel was on the ground and Emma was staring at her hand.
      “You’re holding the shovel wrong.”  I came over and showed her where to place her hands.  She tried scooping up some more dirt with the shovel.
      “Better?” I asked.
      “I think so.”
      “Good.  But you’re still gonna get blisters.”
      I showed Emma how to spread out the dirt on the side of the mound, so it didn’t make a huge bulge, or fall down in big clumps.  If we were gonna have a secret hideout, we couldn’t have everyone knowing where it was.
      After an hour of work, I was covered with dirt and had to lie down in the tall grass to rest.  But Emma was working at the same slow pace, looking like she had just bathed for church.  “Did you ever build a cave back in Boston?” I asked.
      “No,” said Emma.  “There wasn’t anywhere like this.  We lived in a row house.”
      “What’s that?” I asked.
      “A bunch of houses built next to each other, so that they share walls.  You can get a whole bunch of row houses on one city block.  Maybe nine or ten.”  
      “Nine or ten houses on one block?” I asked.
      Emma shrugged.  “Maybe more.  There were always people around, sitting outside on their front porches, visiting.  Kind of like people do at Mrs. Pooley’s store.”
      I thought for a moment.  “Guess there’d be a lot of people to play with.”
      “Yeah,” said Emma quietly.  “And a lot of noise too.”
      “What if you need a little peace and quiet?”
      “I’d go to my room and read a book.”
      “Didn’t you have a tree to sit in?  Or a field to run around in?”
      “There was a park across town.  But we had to take the streetcar there.  And Mama didn’t like me to go alone.  And it cost a dime.”
      I imagined having to pay a dime every time I wanted to see a tree or look at the sky or just be still and listen to my thoughts.  If I had to live in one of those row houses, maybe I’d take up reading too.    
      
      





