 11 – ROOT BEER AND HARD TACK

      It took me and Emma about a week, but we finally had the cave big enough so that we could both crawl inside.  We went to the riverbank and picked up two large stones and used them to pack the walls hard and smooth.  Sunlight trickled in through the vines we had woven together for the door, making shapes of light on the dirt floor.
      “Know what would make this absolutely perfect?” I asked.
      “What?”
      “A bottle of soda,” I said.
      “How about a whole case of soda?” Emma suggested.  “It’d stay cold in the cave.”
      I thought this over.  I had a couple of dimes at home, and almost a whole year to save for the 4th hunt.
      “We can split the cost,” Emma continued.  “Mama gave me some money when we took that train down from Boston.”
      I nodded.  “Sounds good to me.”
      Me and Emma ran home to get our money.  I picked up my wagon to pull the soda in and we headed on over to Mrs. Pooley’s store.  When we got there, Big Foot was sitting in one of the rocking chairs, his feet propped up on an empty box.  
      “Well if it ain’t Dit and his nigger girl.”  He took another sip of his beer.
      I didn’t know what to do.  I’d heard Big Foot call colored folks in our town names before, but not right to their face.  “Hello, Big Foot,” I said.
      Emma didn’t say anything.
      “Ain’t your mama trained you right,” Big Foot said to Emma.  “A white man speak to you, you say hello.”
      “Hello,” mumbled Emma, then turned to me.  “I’m going inside.”
      I waved bye to Big Foot, then followed Emma inside.  Found her standing in the back of the store, staring at the floor.  “You all right?” I asked.
      “I don’t like that man,” Emma said.  
      “Nobody likes him much.”
      Emma said nothing.
      “Cream or root beer?” I asked.
      “What?”
      “What kind of soda you like?”
      “Root beer,” Emma said.
      “Me too,” I said, and handed her my dime.
      Emma paid Mrs. Pooley for the soda while I loaded the case into my wagon.  We went out the back door, just in case Big Foot was still there.  On the way back to the mound, Emma suggested we stop at the post office and say hi to her daddy.
      That was fine with me.  Mr. Walker sometimes asked me and Emma to help him sort the mail.  Emma thought this was boring, but I kind of liked it.  Besides, the post office was right next to the train depot, and I was always up for a little train watching.  
      Soon as we entered, Mr. Walker looked up from his record book and grinned.   “Boy, I sure am glad to see you two.  My leg is hurting something awful today.  Think you could stay a while and help me sort the mail?”
      “Sure,” I said.  Mr. Walker found Emma a sharp knife while I dragged the mailbag over to the corner with the mailboxes.  Emma slit open the bag and we started pulling out piles of letters, bills, and catalogues.  We had to put everything into the right mailbox.  My family’s was number 14.  I got into a rhythm while I worked – glance at the letter, see the number, stick it in the box.  Found it kind of relaxing.
      But Emma was awful quiet.  “You okay?” I asked.
      “Of course.”  Emma kept sorting the letters into piles.  
      Was she still upset about Big Foot?  Should I have said something to him when he was nasty to her, back at the store?  I wanted to ask her what she thought, but I wasn’t sure if that’d make things worse.  Mr. Walker was still standing across the room by the front counter, so finally I just lowered my voice and asked, “What happened to your daddy’s leg?”
      “I don’t want to talk about it.”
	Before I could press her about it, my pa came into the post office.  He and Mr. Walker had been friendly since the fishing trip, and I thought maybe he was stopping by just to say hello.
	“Hi, Pa!”  I cried out.
	Pa hardly looked at me as he rushed over to the counter where Mr. Walker was working.  	
      “Do you have the new Sears and Roebuck catalogue?” Pa didn’t say hello to Mr. Walker either, but that only made me feel a little better. 
	“Yes,” Mr. Walker said, reaching into his desk and pulling it out.  “Is something wrong?”
	“Thank goodness,” said Pa, wiping his forehead with his sleeve.  “Can you place an order by telegraph?  There’s been so much rain, half my corn is rotting in the field.  I thought if I got some more seed by next week, I might be able to…”
	“The corn is rotting?” I asked.  
	Pa glanced over at me.  “Uh, hello, Ulman.”
	“Dit,” I corrected.  
	“Yes, Dit, of course.”  He flipped through the catalogue Mr. Walker handed him until he found this right page.  “This is what I need.”
	“Let me get the form,” said Mr. Walker.
	“Are we gonna starve, Pa?” I asked, as Mr. Walker was searching for the correct form.
	“What?”  Pa kept his eyes on the catalogue.    
	“If you don’t get that seed, are we gonna starve?”
	“No, course not,” said Pa.  “Might not be able to send Ollie to that teaching college she’s got her eye on, but we won’t starve.”
	“Found it,” said Mr. Walker, picking a pen up off the counter.  “Now just tell me what you want it to say.”
	“But if we don’t have no corn,” I continued, “how we gonna feed the cows, pigs, and chickens?”
	“Dit, I don’t have time to answer all your little questions.”  He turned to Mr. Walker, “How many words do I get for 50 cents?”
	“I’m working,” I muttered under my breath, but Pa didn’t hear me.  Emma did, and opened her mouth to say something, but just then a train whistle blew.  
      Trains passed through Moundville six times a day: 7 am, 9 am, 12 noon, 4 pm, 7 pm, and 9 pm.  The post office clock said it was almost 4:30 now, so it couldn’t be one of the ones on the daily schedule.  I glanced out the window.  The train wasn’t stopping, just chugging slowly through the station.  A man stuck his head out of a train car window and hollered, “We’re off to get Kaiser Bill!”
      “It’s packed with soldiers,” I cried, as I put down the mail I was sorting.  “Come on!”
      Me and Emma ran out of the post office and over to the train depot.  The United States had just entered the Great War and I guess the soldiers were getting ready to ship out.  The soldiers waved like crazy when they saw me and Emma on the platform.  
      “Good luck!” Emma yelled and waved.
      “Show those German’s what’s what!” I added.
      A young man with a shaved head, poked his head out the window and cried, “We’ll be home by Christmas!”  Then he threw something out the window.
      It was a thick, round cracker.  Pretty soon the others were throwing them too and by the time the train had made it through the station, the platform was covered with crackers.
      Emma ran back to get an old mail bag and Mr. Walker came back with her to help us gather them up.  My father wasn’t with him.  I put a cracker in my mouth and bit down.  “Owe!” I said.  “It’s as hard as a piece of wood.”
      Mr. Walker laughed.  “It’s hard tack, Dit.  Never goes bad, so the soldiers carry it with them in their packs.  Can’t even break it with a hammer, but if you soak it in your mouth or in a pot of water, it’ll slowly dissolve.”
      “Why’d they throw it to us?” asked Emma.
      Mr. Walker shrugged.  “It’s good luck.”
      So me and Emma added that bag of hard tack to my wagon.  Planned to store it in our cave along with the soda.  Figured if Pa didn’t get his seed in time and we got real hungry, I could take some home and gnaw at it, like a dog on a bone.   
      






