 18 – THE DONKEY
      
      That evening I sat at the dining room table with Pearl and Earl doing my homework.  The light from our oil lamp was dim and the numbers seemed to swim in front of my eyes.  “Mama?” I finally called out. 
      Mama walked into the dining room, Lois crying on her hip.  “What Dit?”
      “I don’t understand this.”  I pointed to my math homework.
      “Well, I can’t help you now.”  Mama sounded tired.  “I gotta get the little ones to bed.”
      “But Mama...”
      “Just do your best.”  She walked out of the room.  Mama was still mad at me for ruining my new clothes on the very first day of school.  
      I stared at my paper and finally realized what was bugging me: I had made things right with Chip, but not with Emma.  I slid off my chair and headed towards the door.
      “Where you going?” asked Pearl.
      “Out.”
      “I’m gonna tell!”
      I let the screen door slam behind me.
      A moment later, I stood on Emma’s front porch, still clutching my book and papers.  Must have raised my hand three times before I finally got up the nerve to knock.  After a minute or two, Mrs. Walker came to the front door.  She didn’t say nothing.
      “May I speak to Emma, please?” I asked, looking at the wide, clean-swept boards that made up her front porch.
      “She doesn’t want to see you,” Mrs. Walker said.  She had a clean apron on over her work dress and smelled like baking bread.
      “I know, ma’am.”  I forced myself to look her in the eye.  “That’s why I gotta talk to her.”
      Mrs. Walker nodded and led me into the parlor.  Emma was sitting on the couch reading a book – Tarzan of the Apes.  What the heck kind of name was Tarzan?  
      Emma put down her book and folded her hands in her lap as I approached.
      I took a deep breath.  “I shouldn’t have accused you of telling.”  It was hard, but once I started, the words came a little easier.  “You gave me your word, and I know you ain’t gonna break it.”
      “You hurt my feelings,” Emma said.
      “I’m sorry.”  
      There was a long pause.
      “I ain’t never apologized to no one before,” I said finally.  “Am I doing it right?”
      Emma gave a little smile.  “Mama just made biscuits,” she said.  “Would you like one?”
      “Sure.”  The biscuits were delicious.  I thought admitting I was wrong would cause me to pop like a balloon.  Instead, I felt like a donkey had been sitting on my chest and I’d just managed to convince him to stand up.  
      While we ate, Emma told me about Tarzan.  She went on and on for the time it took me to eat three biscuits, but I still wasn’t sure I understood the story.
      “So there’s this boy, Tarzan,” I repeated.  “And when his parents die, he’s raised by an ape mama?”
      Emma nods.  “Her name’s Kala.”
      “And he teaches himself to read with an old primer?” I asked.  
      “Yes,” Emma explains.  “And then another man teaches him to speak French and…”
      “Do the apes speak French?”  
      “No, but…”
      I shook my head.  “That story sounds a bit too complicated for me.  Anyway, I gotta get on home.  Maybe Mama finally has time to help me with my long division.”
      “I can help you with that,” said Emma.
      “You can?” I asked.
      Before I could say anything else, Emma had shown me how to divide 4673 by 22, explained how to bring down the numbers and write the remainder at the top.   Didn’t take but 5 minutes, and Emma smiled when we were done.  “You catch on quick, Dit.”
      “Nah,” I said.  “I ain’t good at math.”
      “Who told you that?” she asked.
      I shrugged.   
      Afterwards, as I was walking out the door, I heard Mrs. Walker say to Mr. Walker, “I’ve never heard a white boy apologize to my girl before,” and I could hear the smile in her voice.







