 2 - THE GIRL FROM BOSTON

      The girl stood in the doorway of the train, as the whole town looked her over.  My little sister, Pearl, stared at her shoes - shiny, black patent leather without a scuff on them.  Pearl’s ten years old and ain’t never had a pair that ain’t been worn by two sisters before her.  The girl’s mother stepped into the doorway right behind her.  She was colored too and wore a yellow dress made of a gauzy material - Mama later said it was organza.  
      The girl and her mama stepped carefully down onto the platform.  Her daddy got off last.  He wore a tailored suit, walked with a limp, and was just as black as the rest of them. 
      The man looked around and in a crisp, northern accent asked, “Is there a Mr. Sims here?”	
      “I’m Mr. Sims,” said Pa, looking a bit confused.
      “I’m Mr. Walker,” said the man, holding out his hand.  “The new postmaster.”  
      It got real quiet for a moment.  Everyone stared at Mr. Walker.  
       “They is niggers,” said Uncle Wiggens, just as loud as could be.  
      Pa stepped forward then and shook Mr. Walker’s hand.  
      “The boy’s a girl,” I mumbled.  Mama poked me with her elbow, then went to speak to Mrs. Walker.  
      I scowled at the girl.  “What’s your name?”
      “Emma,” she said and scowled right back.
      Mama made me carry home Emma’s trunk in my old wagon.  We had a cabin on our property that we always rented out to the postmaster and his family.  I didn’t understand how one little girl could have more stuff than me and all my brothers.  
      “You play baseball?” I asked as we walked.
      “No,” Emma said.  She shook her feet as she walked, trying to keep the dust off her fancy shoes.
      “I got a real glove.”  I tugged at the wagon.  “The only one in town.”  
      “Maybe down south girls play baseball,” she answered, “but we’re from Boston.”
      I didn’t say nothing.  
      She pulled at the ribbon in her hair.  “You probably don’t even know where that is.”
      “Kentucky,” I answered.  “I ain’t stupid.”
      Emma slowed down to walk beside her mama.  “Mama,” Emma said, loud enough for me to hear.  “Why’d we have to come down South?”
      “Emma,” Mrs. Walker said softly.  “I’ve already told you.  Daddy can’t protest where they send him.  There aren’t many Negroes in the postal service.”
      Emma glanced at me, then back at her mama.  “I don’t think I’m going to like it here.”
      “It’s only for a year,” Mrs. Walker continued.  “Then Daddy can ask for a transfer.”
      A whole year, I thought.  That was a long time to wait for another postmaster.  But maybe then we’d finally get a boy.
      Next morning at breakfast, I sat down next to Ulman.  He’s four years older than me and real smart.  I leaned over to him and asked, “Boston’s in Kentucky, ain’t it?” 
       “No,” he said.  “It’s in Massachusetts.”
      “Oh,” I answered.  I was suddenly mighty interested in my scrambled eggs.






