 22 – THE BUZZARD, PART 2 

      Next day after school, Doc Haley was back at the shop and Elbert was busy giving Reverend Cannon a shave and shoe shine, so I went off to collect some scrap metal by myself.  While I was pulling some wire out of a tree, I stumbled onto an old nest.  In the nest were some owl pellets.  I broke them apart with a stick and poked at the skeletons of mice the owl had swallowed whole, digested, and then spit back up. 
      That got me thinking ‘bout the buzzard I had killed way back in July.  It was now the middle of October.  The bird was probably just a skeleton and feathers, but I had avoided that path all autumn so I hadn’t seen it.  I decided to go and take a look.
      But Emma wasn’t interested.  “I don’t want to see it,” she said and put her nose back in the book she was reading.  It said The Secret Garden on the front.  
      “You scared?” I taunted.
      She rocked in her chair without answering.
      I hadn’t seen Emma since I beat up Bobby.  “Come on,” I coaxed.  “We’ll just take a quick look at the buzzard.”
      “Why?”
      I didn’t want to go see the buzzard alone.  But I didn’t want to admit that, so I just said, “Buzzards eat dead animals.  I want to see if its friends ate it up.”
      “Yuck,” said Emma. 
      “And I can practice shooting some squirrels.”
      “Why do you have to kill anything?”
      “I already told you, hunting ain’t killing.  And I gotta practice for the 4th hunt.”
      Emma went back to reading.  I knew how she felt about the 4th hunt.  If I wanted her to come with me, I needed to come up with something else.  
      “That a good book?”  I asked.
      “Yes.”
      I knew Emma loved to talk about the books she was reading and she was a pretty good storyteller.  It started when Pearl had asked her about Treasure Island last summer.  Then there was the time she’d helped me with my math and told me all about Tarzan.  Maybe the garden book was more interesting than it sounded too.  “Come look at the buzzard with me, I’ll let you tell me about that old secret garden on the way home.”
      Emma closed her book with a snap.  “Fine,” she grumbled.  “Let’s go.”
      I grabbed my shotgun and we started off down the path by the river.  The leaves were changing color and some even had already fallen off the trees.  They crunched under our feet.  The sun shone through the half-bare branches, Emma was collecting all the leaves that were red like my hair, and we were having such a good time, I just about forgot where we were going.  Emma was the one who stopped suddenly and pointed to the large pile of feathers on the ground just ahead of us.  
      I picked up a stick and walked towards it.  It was bigger than I remembered.  I poked the pile.  
      The buzzard jumped up.  
      I was so surprised I stumbled back a few feet and fell down in the dirt.  
      The buzzard wasn’t dead.  Looked even more awful than a normal buzzard, with skin stretched tight across its skeleton.  Half of its dirty, rotten feathers had fallen out.  It was flapping its left wing and snapping wildly with its beak.  Before I could move, it took a big chunk of leather out of my shoe and a bite of my big toe as well.
      “Ahhh!” I screamed.  Blood started to ooze from the hole in my shoe.  
      I scrambled to my feet and hobbled away.  My heart was pounding.  “How come it’s still alive?” I asked.
      “You must have broken its wing,” said Emma.  “It probably can go a couple of weeks without food.”  
      Buzzard don’t eat too regular, it’s true.  But it hadn’t been a couple of weeks – it had been more then three months.
      I watched the buzzard hopping around in front of me.  Its right wing had healed at an odd angle; the bird would never fly again.  It ran in crazed circles.  The buzzard was dying.
      “He’s starving to death,” said Emma.
      I knew what I had to do, but I just couldn’t make myself pick up that gun.  How could I feel so sick about killing something I had thought was already dead?  “What if I brought it food every couple of weeks, maybe a fish or an old chicken leg?”  
      “Dit,” said Emma softly, “you have to shoot it.”
      And I knew she was right.  I lifted the shotgun to my shoulder.  My foot throbbed and it was hard to balance.  The buzzard stopped running then, and raised its head, like it wanted to be sure I had a clear shot.  I fired and the bird stopped moving.  
      Finally had a chance to sit down and tend to my foot.  Emma gave me her handkerchief and I pressed it against my toe to stop the bleeding.  
      “We should bury it,” said Emma, looking at the lump of bones and feathers.
      “No,” I said quietly.  “The other buzzards will be circling soon.  At least they can have a decent meal.”
      Emma let me lean on her shoulder as I limped back down the path, dragging the gun behind me.  The leaves crunched underfoot, just like they had done before, but the color seemed to have drained out of the day.  I couldn’t think of nothing to say.
      “Shooting that buzzard was wrong,” Emma said finally.
      “You told me to,” I protested.
      “I mean the first time, not the second.”
      I thought about it for a moment.  If I had extra dead squirrels, I could throw them to the dogs.  They had to eat too.  But even our old mutt wouldn’t touch a dead buzzard, so there was no reason to kill one.  “I know,” I said softly.  “I won’t do it again.”
      “You promise?” asked Emma.
      “I promise,” I said.  “I won’t kill any more animals.”
      “Good,” said Emma.
      “Least not for fun, anyway.”
      Emma muttered something under her breath, but I didn’t quite hear her.
      We stumbled on a few more yards.  “I probably shouldn’t have beat-up Bobby either.”
      “Probably not,” said Emma, helping me over an old log that lay across the path.
      “But he deserved it.  Way more than the buzzard!”
      She smiled, then seemed to think better of it.  “What did he say?” Emma asked.
      “Who?”
      “Bobby.  I saw him whisper to you, right before you hit him.”
      I told her.  Didn’t want to, but she had asked.  
      Her face got real still.  I swear she didn’t even blink for over a minute.  Then she shook her head.  “You don’t have to defend me, Dit.”
      “Yes I do,” I said.  “You’re my friend.”
      She was silent for a long time.  Finally, she said, “I’ve never had a friend like you.”
      I thought that was a compliment, but I wasn’t quite sure.  We walked without talking a little bit longer.  The afternoon air was warm and everything was still.  It seemed like we were the only two people in the forest. 
      “You ain’t gonna tell no one ‘bout the buzzard, are you?” I asked.
      “Teach me how to hit a baseball,” she said, “and I’ll keep your secret.”
      “I already taught you to throw a ball,” I grumbled. 
       “Throwing a ball without being able to hit it doesn’t do me much good.”
      She had a point.  “Then you gotta help me with my schoolwork,” I said.
      “I already do that.”
      She had a point there too.  “Well you gotta keep doing it,” I insisted.
       “Sure.”  And when she smiled again, I hardly felt my toe ache.  
      But my brain kept right on doing somersaults.  I thought about how I was wrong to shoot the buzzard the first time, but right to put it out of its suffering the second.  Thought about wings healing crooked and longing to jump in the air and fly, but being forced to scuttle about on the ground.  Thought about how I suddenly wasn’t sorry for beating up Bobby, even if it meant I had to sit alone at school.  And I realized that when I spent time with Chip and Bobby, I didn’t do much thinking at all.  




	

