 26– HOW LONG WILL HELL LAST?

      The Negra church was a square, wooden building.  It was small, but neat and tidy, with colorful flowers all along its sides.  Inside were long rows of wooden pews.  A simple cross hung above the alter and there weren’t no stained glass windows.  Most of the worshipers were Negras, but there were a few white children here and there who had come with their maids.  At my church, there were a lot more decorations and a lot fewer people.  Puzzled over that for a minute as I squeezed into a pew with Emma and her family.  Then I folded my hands in prayer and tried not to think about the kittens.  
      “Our sermon today,” Reverend Cannon announced from the pulpit, “is entitled, ‘How Long Will Hell Last?’”
      I gulped.  
      “Those who have been unjust and have inflicted suffering on those smaller and weaker than themselves will burn in hell,” boomed the reverend.  
      I gripped the edge of the pew and watched as my hands turned white.  
      “Those who harm innocent creatures,” the reverend continued, “will suffer in hell as surely as those who’ve broken all of the Ten Commandments.”  
      I looked up.  
      “How long will this hell last?”  
      I didn’t really want to know, but he went ahead and answered his own question.  
      “As long as it would take you to drop one grain of sand at a time into the ocean and use up all the sand in the world.”
      It seemed like he was staring right at me.  
      When a hat was passed around after Reverend Cannon was finally done, I didn’t even hesitate before giving him my dime.			
      After church, I made Emma come with me to the river.  “They’re dead by now, Dit,” Emma said.
      I ignored her and continued to look out over the water.
      “Let’s go home.  You won’t do it again.”  
      “That’s what I said when I killed the buzzard,” I pointed out.  “I did do it again.”   
      Emma shrugged.  “You can’t help it, Dit.  You’re just good at killing things.”
      “Don’t say that!”
      I scanned the water desperately.  There was a log stuck between two rocks, bobbing in place in the weak current.  On the log were two dark bumps.  Could those be kittens?  
      I bundled Emma into a leaky canoe someone had abandoned on the riverbank.  We quickly paddled out to the log.  Sure enough, the two tiny kittens shivered and clung to the wood.  They meowed loudly as we approached.  God had worked a miracle in exchange for my dime.  
      Emma leaned out of the canoe and picked up one kitten, placing it safely into the boat.  As she leaned out to get the other, the canoe tipped and Emma fell into the water.
      I leaned over to grab her, but couldn’t see her.  “Emma?”  Tiny bubbles broke the surface where she had fallen in.  “Emma!”  She can barely swim, I thought frantically.  
      I was about to jump in after her, when Emma finally surfaced, five or six feet away.  She doggy-paddled back to the boat just like Pearl had shown her.  I pulled her back into the canoe.
      She shivered uncontrollably.  “You all right, Emma?”
      “Cold,” she mumbled.  “The water’s cold.”  
      I pulled off my jacket and handed it to her.
      “Dit?”
      “What?”
      Emma pointed.  The log with the other kitten had broken free of the rock and was floating quickly away.  Didn’t even give it a second thought before I dove into the water.  
      Only took me four strong strokes to catch up with the log.  Emma paddled the canoe over to me.  I placed the kitten inside the canoe and then crawled back in over the edge.  We stared at each other, dripping water.  
      “My mamma’s going to kill me,” she moaned as she shivered in my jacket.  “My good dress!”
      “Least we’ll both be in trouble for ruining our Sunday clothes,” I said. 
      Emma smiled.  
      We took the kittens to our barn.  Soon as I put them down in a pile of soft straw, they started to mew loudly.
      “I think they’re hungry,” said Emma.
      There was no way I was gonna sneak into the kitchen and get some milk without my mama noticing.  Luckily, Betsy, our oldest cow, had a sore foot and we hadn’t driven her out to pasture the morning.  So I went to her stall, sat down on the milking stool, and squirted some milk into an old saucer.  Soon as I put the saucer down, the kittens jumped on it, lapping away with their small pink tongues.    
      When I turned around Emma was staring at me amazed.  “Can I try?” she asked.
      “Ain’t you ever milked no cow before?”
      “No,” said Emma.  “The milkman brings the milk in Boston.”
      I figured we really couldn’t do much else ‘til our clothes dried, so I grabbed a bucket and sat Emma down on the stool.
      “This here’s the udder,” I said.  “There are four teats.  You put your hand on one like so.” I showed her how to pinch the teat with her fingers.  “Then you pull down and squeeze and strip that milk right out.”
      Emma tried.  Nothing happened.  She pulled harder.  Not a drop.  Finally, Betsy mooed in protest and flicked Emma with her tail.
      “Let me show you again,” I said.
      “I can do it,” protested Emma.  “Just stop mumbling.  You’re distracting me.”
      “I ain’t talking,” I said.
      “Well, someone is,” Emma said, and we both stopped to listen.
      Sure enough, somebody was saying something, ‘though we couldn’t quite make out the words.  It sounded like it was coming from the other end of the barn.  
      Me and Emma left Betsy in peace and crept down to the empty stall nearest the door.  The kittens followed us too, hoping for more milk.  
      The noises in the stall got louder as we approached.  It sounded like two people, whispering and laughing.  I threw open the stall door.
       There, sitting on a bale of hay, was my oldest sister, Della.  And she was kissing Mr. Fulton’s oldest boy.
      “Della!” I exclaimed.  
      Mr. Fulton’s boy was so surprised he fell backwards off the bale of hay, right into a pile of cow dung.
      I started to laugh.  Even Emma had to fight back a giggle.
      “What are you doing here?” Della asked.  Her hair had fallen down off her head and there was straw in her braids.  Her work apron was bunched up on the floor.
      “What are you doing?” I asked.  Della turned bright red and that made me laugh even harder. 
      Mr. Fulton’s boy jumped up and ran out of the barn so fast, he didn’t even notice he had a big glob of cow poop stuck to the back of his head.  
      Della picked up her work apron and put it back on.  She started to pick the straw out of her hair.  
      I grinned.  “Wait ‘til Mama finds out.”
      “You can’t tell, Dit,” Della pleaded.  “Please, you can’t.”
      “We won’t tell anyone,” said Emma.
      “Speak for yourself,” I said.  “This is too darn funny to keep quiet!”
      “We won’t tell,” continued Emma, “but you have to get us some clean clothes and wash and press the ones we have on.”
      Emma always was a step or two ahead of me.  
      For the first time, Della noticed that we were wet from head to toe. 
      “Sure,” Della answered, “Give me half an hour.  Only one question.”
      “What?” asked Emma.
      “What were you two up to?”
      The kittens peaked out from behind Emma’s leg and gave a little meow. 





