 27– A NEW JOB

      Two weeks before Thanksgiving, Dr. Griffith got a new Model T Ford Sedan.  It was a beautiful, black car with shiny leather seats and a permanent top, so you wouldn’t ever get caught in the rain.  I stopped to admire it on the way home from school.  It didn’t look nothing like my pa’s old Ford.
      Dr. Griffith came out of his house while I was standing there.  “Hi, Dr. Griffith,” I said.  “Need any help starting your car?”
      He shook his head.  “You gotta be careful starting a car, Dit.  You don’t do it right, the crank can reverse and break your arm.”
      I knew this.  Ulman had showed me at home.  “I’ve been practicing.”  
      “On my car?  You been cranking it to hear the engine run and then cutting it off?”
      “No.”
      “Your father’s?” he asked.
      “Maybe.”
      Dr. Griffith sighed.  “Go ahead.  Let’s see what you can do.”
      He climbed into the front seat.  I bent over and cranked the engine.  Did it pretty well if I do say so myself.  The engine soon began to purr.  I grinned.
      The doctor looked me over.  “Get in, Dit,” he said finally.
      “Why?”
      “I drive into Selma once a month to pick up supplies.  Takes about four hours each way.  I could use someone to help with the driving.  You interested in the job?”
      I couldn’t wipe the smile off my face.  
      Only took a couple of days for Dr. Griffith to teach me to drive.  I catch on fast to things like that. Pretty soon I could start the car, drive it a ways, and make it come to a jerky stop.  But that wasn’t enough for Dr. Griffith.  He lectured me on safety too, and when a man was killed three miles north of Moundville on the Tuscaloosa road, he made me go look at the body.  
      “It was raining and he was going too fast for the muddy road,” Dr. Griffith told me.  “I want you to see what happens when a car turns over.”
      The body was covered with a sheet.  Dr. Griffith pulled the sheet back and I saw the man’s face.  He lay perfectly still with his eyes wide open.
      It wasn’t the first time I had seen the face of a dead man.  Once, before I even had my nickname, Pa had taken me to a funeral and lifted me up so I could see inside the casket.  The teenage boy inside was all dressed up in a clean suit.  I thought he looked real nice.  “That’s Eli,” said Pa.  “He’s dead.”  I later learned Eli Howell had been cleaning his gun when it accidentally went off.  Least that’s what some people said.  Others whispered he had killed himself, but his mama convinced Dr. Griffith to say it was an accident so he could still be buried in the churchyard.  So even though it wasn’t the first time I had seen a dead man, it was the first time I understood what I was seeing.  And it gave me the creeps.
      Dr. Griffith wasn’t satisfied ‘til I could change the oil, mend a flat, and change gears as smooth as ice-skating.  But finally, he leaned back in his seat and smiled.  “I think you’re ready.  You’re a smart boy, Dit.”
      “Thank you, sir.”  
      “Why hasn’t your father taught you how to drive?”
      I shrugged.  “We only got one car.  Pa, Ulman, Elman and Raymond can all drive.  We don’t need no more drivers.”  
      Dr. Griffith nodded.
      But as I was walking home that afternoon, I didn’t feel as excited as I expected.  Dr. Griffith was awfully nice, but he wasn’t my pa.






