 28– I MAKE MRS. WALKER REAL, REAL MAD

      I hate to admit it, but Mrs. Seay was a good teacher.  I ain’t never worked so dang hard.  While the old schoolteacher, Mr. Summons, just droned on and on, reading from notes that had yellowed with age, Mrs. Seay found ways to make me forget I was learning.  
      On the Tuesday before Thanksgiving, Mrs. Seay invited Uncle Wiggens to come tell us about his experiences during the War Between the States.  He stood at the front of the classroom, balancing on his one good leg and gesturing wildly as he spoke.  “And then Sherman marched his army through Georgia and burned everything in his way.  Churches, schools, even hospitals, just burned them up like they was kindling.”
      Everyone leaned forward, eyes wide. 
      “Then the Union forces burned the University of Alabama.”  Uncle Wiggens opened and closed his fists, wriggling his fingers.  I think they were supposed to be the flames, licking at the buildings.  “The Yankees didn’t want you to have no education.  If it hadn’t been for General Lee, that’s Robert E. Lee, mind you, none of you would be here today!”
      All the kids gasped.  ‘Course we had all heard Uncle Wiggens’ stories a million times before, but Mrs. Seay was new in town and didn’t know that.  We were smart enough to figure we’d best put on a good show for her or she’d send Uncle Wiggens home and make us go back to arithmetic.  
      “And when they won the war, the Yankees freed all the Negras.  Talk about stamping on Southern honor!  Why those gosh-darn, son-of-a...”
      “Now, Uncle Wiggens” said Mrs. Seay, standing up quickly.  “This is a school.”
      Pearl and a couple of the other girls giggled nervously.
      “But ma’am, it could happen again.  Those Yankees could…”
      “No one is going to burn down our school,” Mrs. Seay said firmly.  “Especially since we have a good lawman like Big Foot protecting our town.”
      “I’m sorry, ma’am.”  Uncle Wiggens said sheepishly, rubbing at the place where his wooden leg attached to his stump.  “It just makes me so angry, I sometimes get carried away.”
      Mrs. Seay brought over a chair and helped him sit down.  “It is upsetting to think about the time we lost the best of a whole generation.”
      I was still imagining dying soldiers that evening after supper when I went over to Emma’s.  We usually did our homework together while Mrs. Walker washed the dishes.  Emma made me repeat just about every little thing that happened at school so she could learn it too.  I said I didn’t ask her to tell me everything she learned at her school, but Emma just rolled her eyes and told me to get on with it.  
      So I started telling Emma about General Sherman and him burning schools.  Even wiggled my hands like Uncle Wiggens.  But when I got to the part about us losing the best of the whole generation, Mrs. Walker jumped in.  “What did you say, Dit?”  
      “I was just telling Emma what Mrs. Seay said,” I explained.  “About how sad it was that the South lost the war.”
      “Sad for whom?”  Suds dripped off Mrs. Walker’s hands and onto the floor, but she didn’t seem to notice.
      “Why for everyone.” 
      “Maybe to men like Uncle Wiggens it was a sad day,” Mrs. Walker hollered, “but not for us Negroes!  Dit, do you have any idea where we’d be if the South hadn’t lost the war?”
      My hands were sweating.  I’d never even heard Mrs. Walker raise her voice before.  “Back in Boston?”  
      “Picking cotton on a plantation in South Carolina!”  She threw down her dishrag and began to pace the room.  
      “Your great-grandmother used to get up before sunrise and work in the fields all day without a rest,” Mrs. Walker said to Emma.  “If she didn’t work fast enough, she was whipped until the blood ran down her back.  That could have been your fate.”  
      “I know, Mama,” Emma said quietly.
      I tried to picture it, but it was hard.  I could see Bobby in the fields, or even myself, but Emma?
      “After that war was over my grandmother and her children and their children could hold their heads up high and be treated like people instead of animals!”
      I shook my head.  “But Mrs. Seay said...”
      “I don’t care what she said!  The day the Confederate army surrendered was a good day.”  She picked up the wet rag from the floor.  “You’d better go home now, Dit.”
      Emma walked me to the door.  “What’d I say?”  I whispered.  I liked Mrs. Walker, and felt bad that I upset her.  Also, she made the best biscuits in town.
      Emma shrugged.  “You just repeated what Mrs. Seay said.”
      “Then why’s she so angry?”
      Emma bit her lower lip.  “Maybe Mrs. Seay’s wrong.”
      I shook my head.  “She’s a good teacher, Emma.  You said so yourself.  Ain’t that why you make me repeat everything she says?”
      “Even the smartest people make mistakes,” Emma insisted.  
      I thought maybe I just didn’t explain it right, so we decided to meet up the next day after school and talk to Mrs. Seay.  Surely the teacher could explain things so that Emma would understand. 
      But that night in bed, I did some more thinking.  Big Foot had been wrong to steal that hair tonic from Doc Haley.  And Mrs. Pooley shouldn’t have told me to drown those kittens.  It was just possible, I decided, that Mrs. Seay was wrong about the war.    
      






