 30 - THANKSGIVING

      The next day was Thanksgiving and Mama woke us all before dawn.  There was a lot to do if we were gonna eat at noon.  Why we had to eat at noon was beyond me, but you didn’t argue with Mama, especially on a holiday.  
      While Mama and the girls were busy cooking turkey, shelling peas, and baking pies, Pa and us boys scrubbed the floors and washed the windows, in addition to all the normal chores like chopping wood and milking the cows.  Even little Robert and Lois helped Mama get out the good tablecloth and set the table.  We usually ate in shifts, but on holidays Pa moved the card table from the parlor into the dining room and we all squeezed in together.
	Right in the middle of the turkey, Pa asked if anyone had anything they were thankful for.  Della gushed on and on ‘bout Mr. Fulton’s boy and how he was gonna ask for her hand any day now.  Ollie liked the new dress she’d got for her birthday, Ulman was grateful for Mama’s mashed potatoes, Elman was thrilled he hadn’t failed his math test, and Raymond was thankful for the pumpkin pie he could smell in the kitchen.
	Finally, it was my turn.  I cleared my throat, just like Mrs. Seay did when she was trying to make sure everyone was listening.  “I’m thankful for my new job.”
	“You got a job?” said Pa.  He sounded surprised, and I thought a little proud too.  “Doing what?”
	“Driving Dr. Griffith into Selma.  He’s got to go once a month to pick up supplies.”
	“Driving?” said Elman.  “Dit don’t know how to drive.”
	“I do now,” I said.  “Dr. Griffith taught me.”
	“Why’d he do that?” said Raymond.  “Could have just asked one of us.”
	I’d wondered the same thing myself.  “Guess he likes me better.”
	Raymond threw a pat of butter at me.
	“Boys!” Mama said sharply.  “This is my good tablecloth!”
	Pa shook his head.  “So my boy knows how to drive.  Well I’ll be…”
      But just when he was about to say something nice (or at least I think he was) Robert decided to imitate Raymond and throw a pat of butter.  Only he knocked over his glass of milk instead.  It spilled all over the tablecloth.  Mama started wailing, so Ollie jumped up to get a towel, but she ran into Della, who’d had the same idea, and they knocked over a chair.  Then Pearl reached for a drumstick and tipped over the green beans, and Earl started whining ‘cause he wanted a drumstick and there weren’t no more left, and the subject of me driving didn’t come up again.
      
      That evening me and Emma sat down on our front porch.  She had eaten dinner with her family over at the church.  I was complaining about my family and how loud they were and how I never got to say nothing and how irritating and…
      “I don’t know, Dit,” Emma interrupted.  “It doesn’t sound so bad to me.”
      “That’s ‘cause you don’t have any brothers or sisters.”
      “Yeah.”  She bit her lip.  
      “What?”
      “I think my mama always wanted more children.”
      “Why you think that?”
      “Once, when I was real little, she told me I was gonna have a brother or sister.  Then a couple weeks later, Daddy had to get the doctor in the middle of the night.  They never said anything more about it after that.  They thought I forgot ‘cause I was so small, but I didn’t.”
      “Oh,” I said.
      Emma shrugged.  “Reverend Cannon says we ought to be thankful for what we do have, instead of cursing what we don’t.”  She sighed.  “It’s not always so easy.”
      “Least we both got families,” I said.  “Think about poor Jim Dang-It, out in that cabin all alone.”
      We looked at each other.  
      “Do you think your mama has an extra pie?” asked Emma.
      “Shoot, Emma,” I said, “My mama has so many, I could steal one and she wouldn’t even notice.”
      “We brought home some extra chicken from the church.”
      “Think Jim would mind some visitors?” I asked.
      “There’s one way to find out.”
      So that’s how me and Emma found ourselves knocking on the door of Jim Dang-It’s cabin late that night.  
      “What you dang kids want?” Jim growled as he pulled the door open.
      “We brought you dinner,” said Emma.  “Happy Thanksgiving.”
      Jim broke into a grin, bigger than two arms held wide.  “In that case, come on in.”
      “It ain’t much,” I said, as we sat down at his tiny table in front of the fire.
      “Just some chicken and an apple pie,” Emma added.
      Jim Dang-It was thoughtful for a moment.  “An Indian, a Negra, and a white boy, sitting down to share some chicken and an apple pie.”  He nodded.  “Sounds like a pretty good Thanksgiving to me.”
      And it was.






