 31 – SELMA  

      Me and Dr. Griffith set off early the next Saturday on our first trip to Selma.  We were lucky – it was sunny and hadn’t rained for a while, so the roads were good.  In towns, people spread gravel on the roads to keep down the mud, but in between the towns, there was only hard packed dirt.  
      Dr. Griffith let me drive the first half of the trip.  I liked driving, mainly ‘cause it took all my concentration and I couldn’t worry ‘bout nothing else.  When we switched drivers, Dr. Griffith said I had done a great job.  “I might even let you drive alone one of these days.”  I smiled so big I thought the skin on my cheeks was gonna split.  
      We got to Selma just before noon.  Selma is an old wealthy town that saw lots of action during the War Between the States.  About 18,000 people live there.  I bet Emma could figure out how many times bigger than Moundville that is, but if you ask me, all that matters is that it’s real big.  I had only been to Selma once before, and I was so little I couldn’t remember much.
      Me and Dr. Griffith ate lunch at the drug store where he bought me a hamburger and a root beer float.  When we were done eating, Dr. Griffith went to pick up his orders and I wandered around Main Street.  Next to the drug store was a fancy hotel.  On the other side of the hotel was a general goods store, three times the size of Mrs. Pooley’s.  After that was an ice cream parlor.  They had a room in the basement where they made the ice cream and the man behind the counter told me I could go watch.  It was cold as a winter morning in that room, all year long.
      Across the street from the ice cream parlor was Pearson’s Pool Hall.  There was a big sign in the window that read, “No one under 21 admitted.”  Maybe Chip wasn’t lying about the pool hall after all.  I was just getting ready to sneak inside myself, when Dr. Griffith walked up and said it was time to go.   
      We were back in Moundville before suppertime.  He gave me four dimes for the day’s work, even though I would have gladly driven the car for free.  I was gonna enter the 4th hunt next year, and I was gonna win.
      But the dimes reminded me of the one Mrs. Pooley had given me for getting rid of the kittens.  The 4th hunt wasn’t the same thing at all.  I knew that.  Drowning kittens was just wasteful and the 4th hunt, well it was a tradition.  It was how we knew who was the best hunter in town, and hunting was important ‘cause that’s how people got their meat.  Besides, how else was I gonna get Pa to stop calling me, “Della, Ollie, Ulman, Elman, Raymond, uh, I mean Dit?”  
      
      Monday was gonna be my first day back at school since Chip and Bobby had locked me in jail.  I was so nervous I woke up before dawn.  My hands were sweating as I did my chores and I dropped a bucket of coal all over the clean kitchen floor.
      “Dit!” Ollie cried.  It was her job to clean the floor. 
      “Sorry,” I said.  I wiped my hands on my pants, as she passed me a broom to sweep up.
      I hardly touched my eggs at breakfast, which meant more for my brothers, so Raymond and Earl could tell something was wrong too.  On the way to school, I finally broke down and told them what had happened.
      Raymond pounded his fist into the palm of his hand.  “I’ll teach Chip a lesson.”
      “No,” I said.  “I just want to forget about the whole thing.”
      “I’ll protect you, Dit,” said Earl.  “Just let those two bullies try anything again.”
      My little brother was hardly strong enough to wrestle a squirrel, but I appreciated the thought.
      ‘Course after all that worrying and fretting, nothing happened.  Chip and Bobby just left me alone.  At recess I played marbles with Earl and Raymond and gave Pearl and Mary piggy-back rides.  It actually turned out to be a real nice day.
      That evening, I was over at Emma’s, eating Mrs. Walker’s biscuits again.  I guess she had forgiven me.  I was the only one who could get Emma to stop reading that dang history book for more than a few minutes at a time. 
      “I ain’t working for Mrs. Pooley no more,” I said casually, pretending to focus on my math homework.
      “You’re not?” Emma sounded interested, but she didn’t take her eyes from the book.
      “No.  I got a job driving into Selma for Dr. Griffith.”
      “Oh.”  She was still reading.  
      “I want to be good at something ‘sides killing things.”  
      Emma put down her book.  “You are good at other things,” she said.
      “Like what?”
      “Skipping stones.  Baseball.”  A curl escaped from her braid and hung right over her eyes.
      I shook my head.  “Something important.”
      Emma bit her lip.  “You’re good at being my friend.”
      “Is that important?”  I asked.
      “Yes,” she said quietly.  “It sure is.”  
      I saw her looking at me.   Without thinking, I brushed the curl out of her eyes.
      She looked away.
      Had I upset her?  I didn’t know what to say.  So I simply picked up my pencil and did some more long division.







