 32 – CHRISTMAS  

	The week before Christmas Ulman, Elman, Raymond, me and Pa went out into the forest to cut down a pine tree.  Got the biggest one we could find.  It took all four of us boys to carry it home.  While we were gone, Mama and the girls popped corn over the coals in the kitchen.  They strung the popped corn into large ropes, with bright red cranberries spaced in between the kernels.  Mama had a set of eight porcelain bells that she had gotten as a wedding present.  Only she was allowed to hang them on the tree.  When no one was looking, I’d flick a bell with my finger to hear the tiny ring.
	Reverend Cannon at the Negra church had found out Emma could play piano, so she spent the week before Christmas practicing on the church organ for the Christmas Eve service.  I snuck inside and listened to her.  She was much better than old Mrs. Weeks who played at our church.  
	One day Emma saw me sitting in the back row of the pews.  “Dit,” she exclaimed.  “I got you a Christmas present.”
	“What?” I asked.  
	“It’s a surprise!”
	I started to worry.  If she had a present for me, I’d have to get a present for her.  Thought long and hard about what to get Emma.  In my family, we just got stuff in our stockings.  I didn’t have enough money to buy her something real special, like a new book.  If I bought her something small and girly, like a handkerchief or some perfume, someone was sure to see me in Mrs. Pooley’s store.  Word would get back to Chip or Bobby and that would set me up for a lot more grief.  So I decided to make her a twine baseball.  After all, I was teaching her how to play.
	I went to Mrs. Pooley’s store and bought the small rubber ball we used as the base for 5 cents.  A roll of twine was only 10 cents more, so that wasn’t much gone from my 4th hunt money.  Best of all, I could work on the present in front of anyone – even Emma – and no one would think a thing about it.
	I wound the twine carefully, trying to make it even on all sides.  Raymond was really better at winding balls than me, but I wanted to do this one myself.  When I was finished, I wrapped it in a piece of old newspaper and hid it under my bed.
	On Christmas Eve we all took a bath, just like it was Saturday evening.  Right after supper, we all went to church.  The preacher kept talking about the Star of Bethlehem and how amazed the shepherds had been when they had seen it.  Our preacher wasn’t as enthusiastic as Reverend Cannon at Emma’s church, but I tried to pay attention.  I didn’t want to accidentally end up going to hell.  But the Christmas candles were so pretty and the pine wreaths smelled so nice all I could think of was, I sure hope I get some candy in my stocking.  When Mrs. Weeks started playing, it didn’t sound half as good as Emma, and I started wondering if she would like her present.  It was Christmas after all.  Surely God would understand if my mind wandered just a little.  

	The next morning our stockings were filled with oranges and peppermint sticks.  Oranges in winter were something special, and I savored each juicy section.  For breakfast there was sausage, ribbon cane syrup, hot light biscuits, and all the fresh butter and sweet milk you could eat.  Pa made a big wood fire in the parlor.  Usually we used coal to heat our rooms, so the flames and popping of the wood made things seem special.  We roasted pecans over the fire and sucked on our peppermint candy.
	In the afternoon, I snuck out to meet Emma at our cave.  I got there first and sat clutching the lumpy, newspaper-wrapped package in my lap.  There was a chill in the air.  I’d grabbed one of Raymond’s old sweaters, but there were patches on the elbows and the cold leaked in, causing me to shiver.  
	“Merry Christmas!” exclaimed Emma as she ducked into the cave.  
	“Hi,” I said.  She had on a new red coat.  The hood was trimmed with white fur.
	“Open it!  Open it!” she squealed, thrusting a package wrapped in green tissue paper into my hands.  “I can’t wait any longer!”
	I was pretty curious myself so I tore off the green paper fast as can be.  It was a brand new, spanking clean baseball.  I forgot about being cold.
	“Emma…” I started, but nothing else came out.  
	“Turn it over,” she said grinning.  
	I turned the ball over.  On the other side, in clear black ink, was a signature.  Walter Johnson.  I stared.
	“Do you like it?”  Emma asked.  “Last month I asked my daddy who was the greatest baseball pitcher around and he said Walter Johnson.  So I wrote Mr. Johnson a letter and told him my best friend was a big, big baseball fan and could he please, please, please send him a signed baseball for Christmas.  The package came last week and I just about burst waiting to give it to you.  Do you like it?”
	“Emma…” I said again, but I couldn’t go on.
	“You like it!” she said, breaking into a huge smile.
	Like it?  This was the nicest thing anyone had ever done for me and all I had for her was an old twine baseball.  I was embarrassed, but there was nothing else to do ‘cept hand over my poorly wrapped package.  
	Emma unfolded the newspaper carefully.  “Oh Dit,” she sighed when she saw the ball, “did you make this for me?”
	I nodded.
	She picked up the baseball.  “My very own baseball.”  She pressed it to her heart. “This is about the sweetest thing anyone’s ever done for me.”
	“It’s just an old baseball,” I said.  But she insisted on gushing over it, like it was made of pure gold.  It wasn’t ‘til we were outside throwing the twine baseball back and forth that I finally believed Emma liked her present too.
	That evening, the whole town lined up along Main Street.  Me and Emma showed off our new baseballs to just about everyone.  Even Chip and Bobby didn’t tease us, just said, “Merry Christmas,” and kept on walking.  When it got dark, Pa and Dr. Griffith shot off fireworks.  The beautiful red and yellow and green sparkles in the sky must have looked just like the Star of Bethlehem looked to the shepherds in the field.







