 33 – THE FAMOUS DING LING CIRCUS

      When I walked into school after the Christmas holidays, the words The Famous Ding Ling Circus were written on the board.  I was real glad that we were doing something different, ‘cause maybe that would help me smooth over my problems with Chip and Bobby.  Don’t get me wrong, I was still mad – especially at Chip.  I knew we’d never be friends like we were before, but Moundville was too small to ignore them forever.
      Mrs. Seay stood in front of the class, a broad smile on her face.  “This year, we are going to put on a play,” she announced.  “The Famous Ding Ling Circus is about a Chinaman who comes to the United States to put on a circus and become rich and famous.  Everyone will have a part and it’s going to be lots of fun.”  
      I was excited.  Pa had taken Della to the circus when she was still an only child.  For years when she put us younger kids to bed, she told us stories of the acrobats and clowns and lions and tigers and elephants.  I had always wanted to go to the circus myself, but it didn’t often come to Alabama.  Being in a play about a circus was almost as good.  
      Mrs. Seay wrote the names of all the roles on the board and started to assign parts.  Pearl got to be the tightrope ballerina and Raymond volunteered to be a cowboy.  I had my eye on the lion tamer and was waiting for Mrs. Seay to get to that part.
      “Now we also need a ringmaster,” said Mrs. Seay.  “This is the starring role.”
      Of course, no one raised their hand.  Who wanted to learn all those lines?
      “Come on,” Mrs. Seay coaxed.  “This is the great Ding Ling, come all the way from China to seek his fortune.”
      I slumped down further in my seat. 
      “Well, someone has to do it.”  Mrs. Seay tapped her pearls with her ruler.  “Chip, how about you?”
      “No way!” said Chip.  “I don’t want to be no Chinaman with slitty eyes!”
      The class laughed.  
      “Then you, Dit.”  She pointed the ruler at me.
      “But I want to be the lion tamer!” I protested.
      “Chip can do that part.  You’ll be the ringmaster.”  And it was settled just like that.  Chip glanced over at me and grinned.  I looked away.
      After school, I trudged up to Mrs. Seay’s desk.
      “Mrs. Seay, I really don’t want to be the ringmaster.”
      “Dit, I’m sure you can do it.  You’re one of my best students.”  She didn’t even look up from her papers.  
      “No I ain’t,” I said.  “You only think so ‘cause Emma helps me with my homework.”
      Mrs. Seay looked up.  “That little Negra girl?”
      I nodded.  “There’s no way I’m gonna be able to learn all those lines.” 
      “Well, I’m sorry, Dit, but you’re going to have to try.”  She gave me a smile and went back to her papers.
      Over the next few weeks, I spent hours at the Walker kitchen table, studying my script while Emma read the large history book.  Most of our evenings went something like this:
       “Welcome ladies and gentlemen to the most fabulous...”
      “...fantastical...” Emma corrected, not even looking up from her book.
      “...most fantastical circus of the year.”
      “...of the century.”  Emma turned a page of her book.
      I looked at her and frowned.  “How come you know my lines?”
      “I’ve heard you repeat them often enough,” she said.
      “Go back to your own work.”
      Emma smiled and continued reading.  
      Finally, I admitted that going over my lines once a day was not enough.  So in the afternoons, me and Emma started studying in our cave.  It was late January, but not too cold.  Emma wore her pretty red coat and I just threw an old blanket around me.  She would hold the script, and I was supposed to say my lines.  It usually went more like this:
      “Now turn your attention to the death-dying...”
      “No,” Emma interrupted.  “Now turn your attention to the death-defying...”
      “Now turn your attention to the death-defying tightrope walkers, who...” I stopped.
      “Who what?”
      “I don’t remember.”
      “...who will dazzle your eyes with their feats of balance!”
      I grabbed the script from Emma and threw it down.  “I only wanted to be the lion tamer.”  I took a soda from our stash.  “Read me some of your essay.”
      Emma had finished reading the fat history book and was now working on her essay for Mrs. Seay.  It was good.  Real good.  ‘Course she made it sound all smooth and flowery, but the point was this: during the war, both sides did bad things.  Sherman was wrong to burn the homes and businesses of innocent people.  But the war also brought freedom to millions of Negras.  It forced us to come together as one country.  And even though I was from the South, Emma’s essay made me decide that I was glad the Union had won the war.  
      I clapped when she finished reading the paper.  Emma played with a corner of her paper.  “Stop teasing me, Dit.” 
      “I’m not teasing,” I said.  “It’s real good.”
      Emma smiled.  “Tomorrow, I’m going to give it to Mrs. Seay.”  Her smile slowly faded.  “If that’s okay with you.”
      “Of course.”  I wanted to see Mrs. Seay’s face when she realized how smart Emma was.
      “But Chip and Bobby…”
      “What about them?”
      “I don’t want you to end up in jail again.”
      “How’d you hear about that?”  I’d never mentioned it.
      “People talk.”
      I waved my hand in the air.  “I don’t care about them,” I lied.
      Emma smiled again.  “Thanks, Dit.”
      I got up to go home.
      “Dit,” Emma called out.  
      I stopped in the mouth of our cave.
      “You’re my very best friend too.”
      And just like that, my lie was true.  I really didn’t care about Chip or Bobby.  Who needed them when I had a friend like Emma.






