 34 – THE LION TAMER 

      The next day Mrs. Seay asked everyone to stay after school to rehearse the play.  It was almost the end of January, and no one was even close to knowing their lines.  “Let’s take it from page five,” she said.  Her dress wasn’t quite as crisp at it had been that morning and even her hat was little out-of-shape.
      I flipped through my copy of the script.  “Where?”
      “From the lion tamer’s entrance.”  Mrs. Seay tugged at her necklace.  I think she was beginning to regret ever having come up with the idea of doing a play in the first place.  
      “We ain’t got no lion tamer,” said Pearl.
      “What?” asked Mrs. Seay.
      “Chip’s not here,” Raymond explained.
      “Wasn’t he here this morning?” asked Mrs. Seay.
      “He went home at lunchtime,” I said.  “Said his stomach hurt.”
      Mrs. Seay sent Raymond to Chip’s house to find out what was going on.  Turned out Chip was in bed with appendicitis.  Dr. Griffith told his mama, she had better send him down to the hospital in Selma.  “They’re gonna cut him open and rip out his appendix,” Raymond reported.  “He won’t be back to school for a long time.”  
      Don’t get me wrong, I didn’t want him to die or nothing.  But I was a little bit glad.
      Mrs. Seay took off her hat and put it down on her desk.  “So now we need a lion tamer.”
      “I can be the lion tamer,” I said.  “Watch as I bravely put my head into the ferocious beast’s mouth.  I pet his mane and he purrs like a kitten.” That was the one part I could always remember.
      “I’m not being the lion if he’s the lion tamer,” said Bobby. 
      “Dit’s the ringmaster,” said Mrs. Seay.  She tugged at her necklace again.  Must have been a little too hard, because there was a tiny pop and pearls flew everywhere.  Mrs. Seay gasped, and her mouth hung open in a small O.  She looked like she was gonna cry as she knelt down and began to gather up the beads.
      Just then, the school door opened and Emma entered.  Everyone turned to look at her.  She blinked and forced on a brave smile.
      “What do you want?” Mrs. Seay snapped from the floor.
      “I just wanted to return your book and give you my essay.”  Emma pulled the thick book out of her bag and placed it on a desk.  Then she held out her essay, her neat black handwriting shiny on the white paper.  
      Mrs. Seay looked lost.  She struggled to her feet, the loose pearls clutched in one hand.  
      “On the War Between the States,” Emma prompted.  “Don’t you remember?”
      “You read this entire book?” asked Mrs. Seay, pointing to the desk.
      “Of course!” exclaimed Emma.  “You told me not to come back until I did.”  Emma glanced at me.  I didn’t know what to say.  
      “We’re rehearsing our play now,” said Mrs. Seay.
      Bobby pointed at Emma, and whispered something to Sally.  She turned to Jill.  They were already gossiping about her.  But I didn’t care what they thought, right?  Emma was my friend and I was gonna be brave and defend her.  If only I could think of something to say.
      Mrs. Seay was still talking.  “…and this is really not a good time to…” 
      Emma was watching me like she was drowning and I had promised to throw her a rope, only I was standing on the riverbank watching her sink into the water.
      “…to come here and think I could stop my lessons with my real students to…”
      “She can be my prompter,” I interrupted.
      “We don’t have any more scripts,” said Mrs. Seay.
      “Oh, I don’t need a script,” said Emma.
      “Little girl,” Mrs. Seay said sharply, “it’s not polite to brag.”
      “Her name’s Emma,” I said, “and she’s not bragging.”  Felt like I was jumping off a cliff as I said that, right in front of everyone.  Sure there was gonna be a big splash as Sally and Jill started talking about me.  But there wasn’t no splash.  They just stopped whispering and looked at Emma.
      Mrs. Seay folded her arms.  “Then what does the ringmaster say when the clown enters?”
      Emma cleared her throat.  “Now put your hands together and welcome Hairy Larry to the stage.  His nose might be red and his hair blue, but his funny bone is screwed on just right.”
      Mrs. Seay looked down at the script.  “How about the elephant trainer?  What’s his line?”
      “When I hit them with my whip, the pachyderms like to dance and dip,” Emma rattled off.
      “A pack of worms?” asked Bobby.  Expected him to say something more, but guess he wasn’t as brave without Chip.
      Mrs. Seay uncrossed her arms.  “What about when the acrobats make their entrance?”
      “The first or second time?” asked Emma.
      That’s when Mrs. Seay finally started to smile.    







