 36 – THE BIRTHDAY SURPRISE

      We started having rehearsals every day after school.  I was excited Emma was gonna be in the play, but a little nervous too.  The other kids knew Emma from the baseball field, of course, but there she was just the little Negra girl who couldn’t hit the ball.  How would they react when they realized she was smart?  Would they think she was stuck-up?  Call her teacher’s pet?  
      I got real worried that first day when Emma started talking about how easy it was to learn her lines.  That’s not too good a way to make people like you.  Then she started chatting with Mrs. Seay about reading and books.  I knew she was a bookworm, but she didn’t have to tell the whole schoolhouse.  Finally, when Emma suggested that maybe one of these days we could do a real play, like Hamlet, Bobby burst out laughing.  “Emma wants to do a play about a ham!” he cried.  “Want to fry up some eggs too?”  Pretty soon everyone was calling her Egghead.
      But Emma didn’t seem to mind being called Egghead.  And she knew everyone’s lines, not just her own, so if you froze up, she’d prompt you in a whisper.  That won Sally and Jill over.  Couple of days later she brought in a book with color pictures of circus animals.  Little Ben and his big brother Nathan crowded around her to see the lions and tigers, and in their excitement, they forgot they thought she was a show-off.  Finally, Emma’s mama sent a basket of biscuits for everyone to share one cold February afternoon.  Then even Bobby had to admit, “That Egghead ain’t so bad.”
      Two days later, on February 7, 1918, we were in the middle of a long division test when Pa came to school and pulled me out of class.  It was my 13th birthday and I was awful glad to see him, especially since I hadn’t studied.  He wouldn’t tell me where we were going, ‘cept to say it was a big surprise for my birthday.  I knew I was finally gonna get “the talk.”
      But when we got outside, Emma and Mr. Walker were waiting in Pa’s car.  “We’re all going to Tuscaloosa to celebrate our birthdays!” exclaimed Emma.  Her birthday was a week after mine, and I guess it was a nice idea, but it meant that – again – I wouldn’t get to be alone with my pa.  
      Emma, Mr. Walker and Pa chattered away like squirrels in an acorn tree.  When we passed a sign reading, “Welcome to Tuscaloosa,” I gave up pouting and started to get excited too.  
      I had been to Tuscaloosa a couple of times before, but it was usually on some holiday to visit relatives.  I wondered if we were gonna see Pa’s oldest sister, Ida.  Aunt Ida’s house was full of tiny, porcelain figurines.  I never got through a visit without breaking something. 
      But instead of turning onto Aunt Ida’s road, Pa dropped us off at a theater on Main Street.  Pa told us he and Mr. Walker were gonna do some shopping and would pick us up after the show.  Then they handed us two tickets and walked away.
      Me and Emma gave the usher our tickets.  He took one look at Emma and pointed to the stairs.  At the top of the stairs was a balcony, looking out over a large theater.  We found two plush velvet seats and sat down.  A moment later the lights dimmed and the play started.  
      It wasn’t like no play I had ever seen, and I had seen half a dozen between church and school.  Huge people walked across the stage.  They smiled and their lips moved, but I couldn’t hear what they were saying.  An organist in the corner played loudly, drowning them out.
      Suddenly there was a large train on the stage.  It came closer and closer.  It was gonna run us over!  I scrunched my eyes closed and waited a long time.
      Finally, I opened my eyes.  There were people and horses on the stage now.  The train was gone.  “Emma,” I whispered, “this is a mighty strange play.”
      “It isn’t a play, Dit,” Emma said.  “It’s a moving picture.”
      “Oh.”  I stared in silence at the rest of the film.  
      When it was over, we stumbled blinking into the bright afternoon sunlight.  Pa and Mr. Walker were waiting for us on the sidewalk.  They took us to a diner where we stuffed ourselves on hamburgers and pie.
      Emma told her daddy the entire story.  “And then the bank robbers came, and threatened to shoot everyone.  And Dit was scared!”
      “I was not!” I lied.
      “You were too.  But so was I.  And then a posse came and rode after them, and shot them all dead.”
      Mr. Walker smiled as he picked at his apple pie.  “Sounds like you two enjoyed yourselves.”
      “This was the greatest day ever,” Emma gushed.
      “Oh, don’t say that yet.”  Pa reached into his jacket and pulled out four more tickets.  On the tickets, in small neat letters was printed: Ringling Brothers Barnum & Bailey Circus. 
      I was so surprised I nearly choked on my piece of cherry pie.  Pa had to pound on my back ‘til I coughed it up.  
      All my dreams of going to the circus came rushing back when I handed the bearded lady at the entrance my ticket.  I followed Pa, Emma, and Mr. Walker into the big white tent.  There were wooden benches for us to sit on and three separate rings.  I wanted to see everything, but how could I look in three directions at once?  We finally picked a bench in the middle and sat down.
      In the first ring were the animals.  A trainer put his head into a lion’s mouth and the crowd roared.  Elephants stood on their back legs.  Monkeys came out riding bicycles.  I had seen pictures of these animals in Emma’s books, but the pictures didn’t show how they moved or the sounds they made.  Seeing them in real life was like having a snowflake melt on your tongue for the first time.
      The trapeze artists were in the second ring, men and women dressed in sequined outfits that shone like sunlight on water.  Every time they leaped, I had to cover my eyes.  But Emma stared.  “They’re beautiful!” she whispered.  
      “Are they dead yet?” I asked, peaking out between my fingers.
      “They aren’t going to fall!” Emma scoffed.
      In the third ring was the Wild West show, a mini rodeo with a cowboy roping a calf, riding a bucking bull, and shooting up white men dressed like Indians.  The Indians had feather headdresses big as watermelons and as colorful as fall leaves.  I could picture them running up and down our mounds, their feathers bobbing in the wind.   
      I thought my eyes were gonna fall out of my head, I was watching so hard.  I didn’t even blink.  ‘Cept once, I looked over at my pa and saw he wasn’t watching the circus, but me and Emma, with a big, big smile.  






