 38 – THE FIGHT IN THE SCHOOL

      The next Thursday was the day everything started to go wrong.  I should’ve realized it.  Should have fallen out of bed and stubbed my toe or something.  But that’s the problem.  Those days start like any other.
      It was the 21st of February - the day of the final dress rehearsal.  After school, Mrs. Seay moved her desk aside and set up a little platform for Emma at the front of the room.  
      “Now turn your attention to the death-defying tightrope walkers, who will dazzle your eyes with their feats of balance.”  Emma’s voice was loud and clear, just like the ringmaster in the real circus.
      Pearl and Mary, wrapped in yards of pink tulle, ran out and started walking on a thin wooden plank.  Mary immediately fell off.
      “Girls!” Mrs. Seay cried.  “Slower is better.”
      “It don’t look so good,” pouted Mary.
      “It looks better than falling off!”  I called out.  Everyone laughed. 
      Mrs. Pooley poked her head in the front door.  “Mrs. Seay, I got those new hairpins you wanted.”  She looked around the classroom.  “What the heck is going on?”
      “We’re having our dress rehearsal,” said Earl.
      I stepped onto the stage.  “Watch as I bravely put my head into the ferocious beast’s mouth.  I pet his mane and he purrs like a kitten.”
      Bobby crawled over to me, a thick yarn mane wrapped around his head.  “Roar!  Roar!” he cried.  I hit him with the whip.  Might have been a bit too hard, ‘cause Bobby called out, “Hey!” and rubbed his back.
      “Sorry,” I said, pretending it was an accident. 
      Emma walked back to the platform, her colorful dress wrapped around her.  “And now Raymond the Renegade will perform feats of marksmanship!”
      Raymond stepped up front with a lasso.  He had spent hours practicing with it in our front yard.  He swung it high in the air and knocked over a pile of books.  Mrs. Seay scurried over to pick them up.
      “What’s she doing up there?” asked Mrs. Pooley.
      “Who?” I asked.
      “The Negra.”
      “That’s Egghead,” said Bobby.
      “Emma,” I corrected.  I watched her proudly.  “Ain’t she good?”
      I didn’t see Mrs. Pooley leave, but I can imagine her hobbling down the street to get Big Foot.  If only she had fallen and broken her dang leg.  Or if Doc Haley hadn’t been out sweeping and hadn’t seen Mrs. Pooley and Big Foot come back into the school.  Or if Mr. Walker hadn’t told Doc to stand up for himself.  Or if Emma had just left.  Or if I had managed to keep my mouth shut.  But wishing you had done things different ain’t never changed a thing.
      We were just finishing up when it happened.  Most of Mrs. Seay’s hair had fallen out of its fancy braids and the room was a mess.  Bits of costumes and pieces of script were scattered everywhere.  Emma stood in the middle of the stage, saying her final lines.  “And so I thank you all for coming to our show today.  We hope you have...”  Emma trailed off, staring at the back of the room.  She never forgot her lines, so we all turned to look.
      Big Foot stood in the doorway.  Mrs. Pooley hovered just behind him.  
      “Mrs. Seay,” he said in his slow drawl, “this here’s a white school.”  The click of his boots echoed in the silent room as he approached Mrs. Seay.  
      “I know that, sheriff.”  
      “Then what the heck is that nigger girl doing up on stage?”  He leaned against a desk, real casual, but the muscles in his neck were tense.  Mrs. Pooley stepped inside the school and shut the door.  I jumped.  
      “Emma was the only one who learned the lines,” Mrs. Seay said quietly.
      Big Foot shook his head and turned to stare at Emma.  Her dress, which had seemed so bright and pretty, suddenly looked all wrong.  Emma picked at a red stripe on the fabric.  Her hand trembled.  
      “You girl,” Big Foot said, “get down from that platform and go on home.”  
      “But she ain’t done with her part yet,” said Pearl.
      Big Foot glared at my little sister.
      “It’s the last rehearsal,” Pearl explained.
      Emma didn’t move.  
      Big Foot took a step closer to Emma.  “Girl, I ain’t gonna tell you again.  Go on home.”
      But Emma didn’t move.
      I stepped into the aisle in front of Big Foot.  “Leave her alone!” I yelled.
      I thought he might hit me, but Big Foot only laughed.  “You defending your nigger girl?  Ought to have better sense than that, Dit.”  He pushed me out of the way.  I could smell the beer on his breath and see the creases from the iron on his shirt.  He walked right up to where Emma was still standing on the stage. 
      “Big Foot, please,” Mrs. Seay said.  “The children are just…”
      “Be quiet, ma’am.  You’re the teacher, but I’m the sheriff.”
      Mrs. Seay was quiet.
      Big Foot put his face right up next to Emma and hissed, “Get out of here, nigger!”
      Emma blinked and stared at the floor.  
      Big Foot grabbed her arm and pulled her off the stage.  Her dress caught on a desk, causing her to fall.  Emma didn’t make a sound as she hit the ground, but Pearl began to cry.
      The front door squeaked open and Doc Haley stepped inside, standing next to Mrs. Pooley. 
      Big Foot picked Emma up and threw her over his shoulder like I’d seen my pa do with a sack of potatoes.  Her face was strangely blank, like she wasn’t even there no more.  I wanted her to cry or scream or something.  What was Big Foot gonna do to her?
      Doc Haley stood in front of the doorway.  “Get out of my way,” barked Big Foot.    
      “Put her down,” said Doc Haley.  “She can walk out on her own.” 
      “I gave her the chance.  She didn’t move.”  
      “She’s too terrified, any fool can see that.”
      Big Foot dropped her then.  Just let go of Emma’s feet and she slid right down his back.  Her head made a loud thwack as it hit the floor.  I ran over to her.  Blood was pouring out of a gash on her forehead.  I pulled off my vest and pressed it against the cut.  
      Big Foot didn’t seem to notice.  He walked up to Doc Haley.
      “Mrs. Pooley, do something!” cried Mrs. Seay.
      “Big Foot,” Mrs. Pooley mumbled, grabbing her son’s shirtsleeve.  “This is not what I…”
      “Hush, Mama.”
      He shook her off, then leaned over and hissed in Doc’s face, just like he had done to Emma, “Get out of here, boy.”
      “No.”  His voice trembled, but he held his head up.  “Not ‘til you leave these kids alone.”
      “I said move.”
      Doc stood so still I wasn’t sure he was even breathing.  Then he shook his head.  
      Big Foot punched him in the jaw.  
      Doc staggered, but remained upright.  
      Big Foot slugged him again.  
      Doc fell to the ground this time.  Blood flowed from his lip to his chin.  He covered his face with his arms.  “Get up!” Big Foot screamed.
      Doc didn’t move.  For a minute, I thought he was dead, but then I saw his chest moving up and down.  Slowly, he uncovered his face, and pushed himself up from the ground like an old man.  He stood there, blood running down his face, and even though he was a good four inches shorter than Big Foot, he suddenly looked like the bigger man. 
      The front door was still open, but Doc didn’t even glance at it.  Just stood still and looked Big Foot straight in the eye.  Outside the sun was shining, and I didn’t understand how that could be when everything was so dark inside.    
      Big Foot charged Doc Haley then, ran at him liked a crazed bull.  They both fell out the open door.  We could hear punches being thrown and then there was the crack of something like a broken bone.  Hearing the fight was even worse than seeing it, ‘cause we didn’t know exactly what was going on.
      But with them out of the building, Mrs. Seay seemed to suddenly remember that she was the teacher.  “Earl, Raymond, out the window,” she ordered.  “Go get Dr. Griffith.”  
      My brothers opened the window, jumped out, and took off at a run.
      I removed the vest from Emma’s forehead.  It seemed like the bleeding had slowed, but it was hard to tell.  There was blood all over my pants and matted in Emma’s hair.  My lion tamer vest was ruined.  Emma’s eyes were still blank and that scared me more than all the blood.
      Me, Mrs. Seay, and Pearl led Emma out onto the front porch of the school.  Doc Haley and Big Foot were still fighting in the middle of the street.  Doc was curled up into a ball.  Big Foot was pounding him with his fists.
      Pa and Earl came running down the street.  Pa grabbed Big Foot and pulled him away from Doc Haley.  “I’m gonna kill you!” Big Foot snarled.  For a minute, I thought he meant my pa.
      “I ain’t done nothing!”  Blood streamed from Doc Haley’s face, and his arm was twisted at an odd angle.
      Big Foot’s clean shirt was now covered in blood.  “Just you wait,” Big Foot hissed, as he shook himself loose from Pa and stormed away.  
      Mrs. Pooley was very pale as she stumbled out of the schoolhouse.  “I didn’t mean to cause so much trouble,” she stammered.  No one answered her.  She shook her head and hobbled off after her son.
      Pa turned to Doc.  He was lying in the gravel in the middle of the road, propped up on his one good arm.  One eye looked bigger than the other and his lip was so swollen, he couldn’t close his mouth.  “You all right?” Pa asked.  
      “I ain’t hit him, Mr. Sims,” Doc said, “not even once.”
      “I know,” said Pa.
      Then Doc Haley collapsed, unmoving, on the ground.  
	






