 40 – THE PLAY

      The next afternoon, me and Emma sat on the top of our mound, just looking at the sky.  I was awful tired, but I guess I must have slept some ‘cause I remember seeing the starry sky one moment and Raymond shaking me awake for chores the next.  On top of the mound, the February wind was cold, but the clouds it brought with it were amazing.  I just wanted to stare at them and think about nothing.  
      “Do you remember the Wild West show?” Emma asked suddenly.
      “Yeah.”  The one cloud did look kind of like a bronco.  I wanted to ask her if she thought so too, but it just seemed like too much trouble.
      “Do you think the cowboys killed the Indians that built these mounds?”
      “I don’t know.”
      Emma began to cry.  I wanted to put my arm around her, but wasn’t sure if she’d like it.  “If I had just left when Big Foot told me to,” she said.
      I couldn’t think of nothing to say.  
      “I thought I was smarter than all those white kids.  That’s why I learned those lines.”  
      “You are smarter.”
      “Shut up, Dit.”  But she stopped crying, sniffed, and wiped her nose on her sleeve.  “You going to the play tonight?”
      “I don’t know,” I said.
      “Aren’t you the ringmaster?” 
      I shook my head.  “I wouldn’t do it.  Pearl and Raymond dropped out too.”  
      “Awe, Dit,” she said softly.  “They didn’t have to do that.  Pearl was so excited about being the ballerina.”
      “I told Mrs. Seay if you weren’t in it, there shouldn’t be no play.”
      Emma smiled, but she still looked sad.
      
      That night I did go to the play, just for a minute.  The schoolroom was packed.  I guess most everyone in town had heard about the scuffle.  Don’t know why that made them come.  Did they think there was gonna be another fight?  Doc Haley was still at the Walkers, and Big Foot was no where to be seen.  Anyway, Bobby stood on the stage as the ringmaster, reading from a script.  
      “Welcome ladies and gentlemen to the most fantastical circus of the cemetery, I mean cent-ury.”  Big Foot’s eagle sat in its cage on a table behind Bobby.  He pointed awkwardly to it.  “Here is the eagle, symbol of my adopted country, the great us-a.  I mean U-S-A.” 
      I couldn’t watch anymore, and went out to sit on the front stoop.  Pearl was already there.  
      “Don’t you want to go in?” I asked her.
      “No.”
      “Bobby’s doing a bad job.”
      Pearl sniffed.  “Don’t expect me to feel better just ‘cause Bobby can’t read.”
      I smiled and sat down next to my sister.  Sometimes, she was okay.  A moment later, Mrs. Seay came out of the schoolhouse and sat down next to us.  
      “You were right, Dit,” she said softly.  “We should’ve canceled the whole thing.”  The three of us sat quietly in the darkness.  Mrs. Seay sniffed a couple of times, like she was trying not to cry.  
      Finally, Mrs. Seay blew her nose and said, “You know, not everyone in town thinks Big Foot is a good lawman.”  
      “You do.  You said so in class, when Uncle Wiggens was there.”  It was a rude thing to say and I knew it.
      “Well,” she took a deep breath, “I’ve been known to be wrong before.”







