 41 – FISH AND BANANAS

      Doc Haley stayed in the Walker’s parlor for a week, ‘til his ankle had healed enough for him to hobble around without help.  Big Foot didn’t leave his front porch for that whole week, just sat there and drank beer.  The bottles lined up all along the porch.  Finally, someone stole the bottles for the deposit money.  I had wanted to, but hadn’t dared.  
      Elbert quit going to school and started working in the barbershop full-time.  Doc couldn’t cut hair or give shaves with his arm broke, so Elbert took all that over and Doc washed the towels and did the sweeping.  Me and Emma brought Doc and Elbert biscuits from Mrs. Walker and half a ham from my mama.  We shucked some corn too and left it all in a basket behind the barbershop.  
      Pa and Dr. Griffith kept watch for two more nights on our front porch, then they put their guns away.  Guess they thought the whole thing was just about ready to blow over.  That’s what I thought.  Doc Haley’s arm was healing just fine.  Big Foot finally left his front porch.  No one in town brought up the play.  
      I made another trip to Selma with Dr. Griffith the first weekend in March.  He didn’t mention that night on my front porch and I didn’t say nothing about it either.  On that trip, I finally earned the last of my 4th hunt money.  The next morning, I took all my pennies, nickels and quarters to Mrs. Pooley’s store and had her change them into two, new, crisp dollar bills.  I folded them carefully and stuffed them into my pocket.  I was gonna carry them with me everywhere, ‘til the day of the 4th hunt finally came.
      It was a fine sunny day with no clouds and just a touch a wind.  I went by Emma’s to see if she’d come fishing with me to celebrate.  
      “I’m not celebrating you entering the 4th hunt,” Emma said, “’cause I still don’t think that’s such a good idea.  But earning a whole two dollars,” she smiled, “that’s really something.”
      I grinned and hoped my pa would think the same.
      “Are you going to ask Elbert to come too?” asked Emma.  “Didn’t he help you when you were collecting the scrap metal?”
      “Yeah.”  The truth was, I was a bit nervous about getting the two of them together.  Elbert had never seemed too fond of Emma.
      “Well, I don’t mind,” said Emma.  “If you want, ask him.”
      So we headed off to the barbershop.  I was sure Elbert was gonna say no, but to my surprise, Doc Haley told him to take the afternoon off.  So the three of us hitched a ride down the road and ended up at the same fishing hole where me and Pa had run into Emma and Mr. Walker.  
      Even sat on the same log across the river.  I was in the middle, with Elbert on one side and Emma on the other.  It was as awkward as it had been all those months before.  The fish weren’t even biting.
      “So Emma,” Elbert said finally, “Dit tells me you like to read.”
      “Yes, I do,” said Emma.  “How about you?”
      “Naw, it ain’t my thing,” said Elbert.
      “Oh,” said Emma.
      This was not going well.
      “Tell him about that book you read,” I coaxed Emma.  “The one with the map.”
      “Treasure Island?” asked Emma.
      “Yeah.”
      “I don’t think Elbert’d be interested.”
      “Oh come on, Emma.  It was great.  It had those pirates, and oh, tell him about the boy who was raised by the apes!”
      “That’s Tarzan,” said Emma, “you’re mixing them up.”
      “A boy was raised by apes?” asked Elbert.
      “In a secret garden,” I explained.  “And there was this boy in a chair with wheels and…”
      “The ape boy?” asked Elbert.
      “No, no, this was a different boy,” I said.  “And he found a treasure map and convinced this girl, Jane, to go sailing with him.”
      Emma laughed.  “You’re messing it up on purpose now!”
      Maybe I was.
      “Let me get this straight,” Elbert said.  “You got a book about pirates, ape boys, sailing girls, and buried treasure in a secret garden?”
      “No, no, no!”  Emma laughed.
      “Well, shoot, if we’d had books like that in school, maybe I’d like reading!” Elbert exclaimed.
      We all laughed then and soon the fish started biting and I shouldn’t have worried because it turned out Elbert and Emma got along just fine.  
      
      We walked back to town.  Could have hitched a ride, but we had a whole string of fish and didn’t want to stink up the inside of someone’s car.  Soon as we reached the edge of town, we saw Uncle Wiggens hobbling by on his bum leg.  He was eating a banana.
      “Hi, Uncle Wiggens,” I asked.  “Where’d you get that?”
      “Banana train’s in town,” he told us as he took another bite.
      We took off running for the train depot.  Bananas arrived in New Orleans by ship.  Occasionally, a passenger train would load up a car or two full of bananas and post a man in each car to sell the stalks as the train made its stops.  
      Sure enough, soon as we reached the depot, we saw the special car, loaded up with green and yellow bananas.  The banana man sat on top in a yellow uniform and cap, calling at the tops of his lungs, “Bananas!  Fresh bananas for sale!”
       “How ‘bout a free sample?” I yelled to the man.  
      “Yeah, right kid,” the man called back.  “I give you a free taste and pretty soon this whole platform’d be swarming with people begging like monkeys.”
      This set the three of us off giggling, especially since we’d spent half the afternoon talking about Tarzan and his apes.  Besides, it seemed like half the town was there anyway.  Dr. Griffith and Mayor Davidson each bought a bunch.  Mrs. Pooley bought a whole barrel of green ones for her store.  Even Doc Haley wandered over from the barbershop, just to watch all the commotion.
      “Oh, please sir,” Elbert cried out as the train started to pull out of the station.  
      “Maybe just a real ripe one you couldn’t sell to anyone else,” pleaded Emma.
      “Ooo, ooo, ah, eee!”  I cried out, jumping around like an animal.
      The man finally grinned and tossed down three ripe bananas.
      We didn’t get bananas too often.  Emma peeled hers carefully, trying to make it last.  But I gobbled mine down, just as fast as a monkey.  Elbert did the same.  Doc Haley laughed.  “You kids that hungry, come on over to the barbershop and I’ll fry you up that fish for dinner.”

      
      
      
      
