 42 – OUT OF THE FRYING PAN

      It had been just about the prefect afternoon.  Me and Elbert were setting the little table in the corner of the barbershop.  Emma was eating the last of her banana as she watched Doc Haley fry up the fish on the tiny stove.
      “That’s not how my mama cooks fish,” Emma said.  
      “Well, girl,” Doc Haley said pleasantly, “you’d better pay attention then, ‘cause once you taste my cooking, you’re gonna want to show your mama how it’s really done.”
      Emma laughed.  The bell on the front door jingled and we all turned to see who it was.
      Big Foot stepped into the store.  His shirt was rumbled and there was a stain under his right arm.  The fading bruises on Doc’s face were blue and purple.  The frying fish sounded awful loud.
      “Elbert,” Doc said finally, “go get Big Foot’s hair tonic.”
      Elbert rushed to get the tonic.  He returned in a moment and handed the small bottle to his pa, who in turn, held it out to Big Foot.
      Big Foot punched Doc Haley in the stomach.  Doc doubled over in pain, still holding the tonic.  Big Foot plucked the bottle from his hand and turned to go.
      “You think you’re such a big man, beating up your own brother!” I called out.
      Big Foot stopped in the doorway and turned toward me.  His scar shone white as ice on his left cheek.  “What did you say?” he growled.
      I glanced at Emma standing by the stove.  Dr. Griffith had taken out the stitches, but if you knew where to look, you could still see the small pink mark on her forehead.  “Nothing.”  I stared at the floor.
      Big Foot took a step towards me.  Doc Haley stepped into his path.  “Don’t you touch him, Big Foot.”  
      “Get out of the way, nigger.”
      “He’s just a child.  If you need someone to hit, hit me.”
      Big Foot turned back to Doc.  “You’ve been talking.”
      Elbert flashed me a look that would have just about killed me, if I hadn’t already felt like I wanted to die.  
      “I ain’t said nothing,” said Doc.
      Big Foot pulled out the large pistol from his hip and aimed it at Doc.  “Then how does he know?”  
      “I don’t know.”  Doc’s face was ashen, but his voice was steady.
      “Tell me, nigger, or I’ll shoot!”
      Emma threw the pan of frying fish into Big Foot’s face.  He lost his balance and as he fell, his gun went off.  Doc Haley dove behind the barber chair.  I grabbed Emma’s hand and pulled her under the small table in the corner.  Elbert pushed over the shelf and ducked behind it.  
      “God damn-it!” Big Foot slapped at his face, frantically rubbing off the hot oil.  It left a large red welt on his right cheek.
      Doc crouched on the floor behind the barber chair and frantically searched a low drawer.  
      Big Foot scrambled to his feet and picked up his gun.  “Come on out!” he cried. 
      I didn’t know if he was talking to us or Doc Haley or Elbert.  I could see Doc still rummaging through the drawer.   
      Doc finally pulled out a small pistol.	
      “I said, come on out!” yelled Big Foot.  Me and Emma didn’t move.  Big Foot was between us and the front door.  
      Doc ducked out from behind the chair and aimed his pistol at Big Foot.  
      Big Foot stumbled back in surprise and almost tripped on the frying pan on the floor.  “So the nigger has a gun,” he said tauntingly.
      “I’m not gonna let you shoot me.”  
      “I told you I was gonna get you.  You should’ve skipped town when you had the chance.”
      “I never did nothing to you.”
      “Just ‘cause we had the same daddy, don’t mean you’re my equal,” said Big Foot.
      “I never said you were my equal.” 
      “Get up off the floor so I can shoot you like a man.”
      “No.”
      Big Foot fired his gun, but Doc Haley squirmed out of the way.  The bullet bounced off the barber chair and hit a mirror, causing shards of broken glass to rain down on the floor.  From under the table, I could see Doc behind the chair, the pistol shaking in his hand.  Big Foot approached the barber chair, his boots crunching on the broken glass.  He was too close to miss now and his finger was on the trigger.
      Doc aimed for Big Foot’s leg, but the sheriff spun the chair around, hitting Doc’s arm. Both pistols went off at once.  The bullet from Doc’s gun hit Big Foot square in the chest.  The sheriff gasped and fell to the ground, twitching wildly. 
      Doc Haley dropped his gun and scrambled to his feet.  With his one good arm, he snatched the gun from Big Foot’s hand and tossed the weapon into the back room.  Big Foot stopped moving, but the red stain in the middle of his dirty shirt kept getting larger.  Doc grabbed a towel from the barber chair and pressed it into Big Foot’s chest, trying to stop the blood.  
      “You all right, Pa?” asked Elbert, standing up from behind the overturned shelf.   
      Doc glanced at the mirror and saw the blood running down the side of his head.  He tried to wipe it away with another towel, but his legs collapsed under him and he fell to the floor.  Only then did we realize he’d also been shot.
      





