 44 – THE TRIAL

      Doc Haley’s trial was held in Selma, ‘cause the district judge said passions ran too high in Moundville for a fair trial.  We followed events in the newspaper.  Every evening I’d pick up the paper from the 7 pm train and run home.  Pa would pull up a chair close to the kerosene lantern and Mama would settle down with her sewing in her lap.  Three or four of us kids would sprawl out on the floor and listen while Pa read the paper aloud.
      The paper made it sound like Big Foot just walked into that barbershop, looking for a haircut.  Everyone in Moundville knew that wasn’t true.  It didn’t mention that the sheriff had a gun or point out that Big Foot had fired first.  I thought me and Emma’d be called to testify, but the paper said we were just children who “couldn’t be trusted.”  Made me madder than a stepped-on bee, but there wasn’t nothing I could do.    
      A couple of newspapermen did come to Moundville to talk to me about the shooting.  I answered their questions, then told them they should also speak to Emma, ‘cause she was there too.  Most just ignored me, but one leaned over and said in a quiet voice, “Boy, no one wants to know what a little colored child saw.”
      “Why?” I asked loudly.  “Her eyes work just as well as mine.”
      The man turned red.  I didn’t see him in town no more after that.
      
      As the trial went on even Mama spent more time ripping stitches out than putting them in.  Got so I didn’t want to get the paper.  But like a fish that can’t help snapping at the lure, I always sat with the others on the floor to listen to Pa read us more bad news.
      “They can say whatever they want in the paper,” Emma reassured me, “but in the end, it’s the jury’s opinion that matters.  We both know it was self-defense, and maybe they’ll see that too.”  I wanted to believe her, but when I repeated her words to Pa, he just shook his head.  
      Me, Emma, and Mr. and Mrs. Walker took the train to Selma to hear the verdict read.  We got up early and caught the 7 am train.  No one said much, not even Emma.
      The courthouse was packed when we arrived.  Like the theater where me and Emma had seen the moving picture, whites were on the main floor and the balcony was filled with Negras.  I squeezed with Emma and her family onto the balcony.  A couple of old Negra women glared at me and I heard Mr. Walker whisper to them, “He’s all right.” 
      Far below us, Doc Haley sat at a small table, Elbert by his side.  I waved, but they didn’t see me.  Doc looked tired, his face pinched, the pale scar from the bullet wound clearly visible.
      The jury slowly filed in.  They were all white.  One man handed an envelope over to the judge.
      “Will the defendant rise?” said the judge.
      Doc Haley slowly rose to his feet. 
      “In the state of Alabama, a jury of your peers...” said the judge.
      Mrs. Walker snorted.
      “... finds you guilty of murder in the first degree.”
      The room was absolutely silent for a moment, then Doc collapsed into his chair and everyone began to talk at once.  The judge pounded his gavel, but no one could hear what he was trying to say.  Beside me, Mrs. Walker and Emma began to cry, while Mr. Walker pounded his fist on the balcony railing ‘til I thought it would splinter.  
      In the courtroom below us, Elbert put an arm around his father.  A cold pit formed in my stomach and I felt dizzy.   Doc Haley was gonna hang.







