 46 – THE EXAM

	The next morning when I woke up, I was still on the floor.  Dr. Griffith was gone, but someone had draped a blanket over me.  I stood up and looked around the room, counting: Pearl, Earl, Raymond, Lois.  Everyone was still breathing.  
	I wandered into the kitchen.  Found Robert standing on a chair, trying to reach the cupboard.
	“I’m hungry, Dit,” Robert cried.
	He was only four.  Couldn’t expect him to get his breakfast on his own.   
	“Let me get you a biscuit,” I said.  I found a couple in the breadbox and got out the butter and some jam.  
	“Eggs, I want eggs,” whined Robert.  
	“Maybe later,” I said, placing a plate in front of him. “Eat this now.”
	Robert dug into the biscuit like he ain’t ate in the week.  I wondered if anyone had remembered to feed him last night.  “Don’t be mad, Dit,” he said between bites.
	“Why’d I be mad?” I asked.
	“I broke a glass.”  Robert pointed to the corner.  “Wanted some milk.”
	“I ain’t mad,” I said.  “Let me get you that milk.”
	While Robert drank his milk, I swept up the broken glass.  Seemed awful quiet in the kitchen with just me and Robert, ‘stead of Mama and Pa and everybody else.
	“Ain’t you gonna eat nothing?” Robert asked.
	I shook my head.  I wasn’t hungry.
	Mrs. Walker came down the stairs and into the kitchen.  I guess she’d come in sometime in the night.  I was awful glad to see her.  
      “How’s everyone?” I asked.
	“All alive in this house,” she said, stirring a pot I hadn’t even noticed on the stove.   
      “And Emma?”  She and her daddy had come down with the flu a couple of days before.
	“Emma’s almost all better.  Mr. Walker isn’t doing quite as well, but he’s on the mend.”
	I nodded, and my stomach unknotted just a little. 
	“I’m going to take this broth up to your parents,” Mrs. Walker said pouring the soup into smaller bowls.  
	“Can I do anything?”
      “Maybe tonight you could stop by to read to Emma and Mr. Walker.  I’m sure they’d be most grateful for the distraction.”
	“Sure,” I said.  
	“I’m still hungry, Dit,” Robert piped up.
	“Come on, then,” I said.  “Let’s go see if those chickens have laid any eggs.”

      That evening when I came by, Mr. Walker was still in bed, softly snoring.  I sat on a chair next to his bed; Emma dozed on a pallet on the floor.  She was weak, but feeling a lot better.  I held her book of poems open on my lap, but didn’t feel like reading.   
      “You all right, Dit?” Emma whispered.
      “Bobby died yesterday,” I said softly.  “Dr. Griffith told me tonight when he stopped by.”
      “Oh,” said Emma.
      I stared out the window.  Bobby hadn’t been too nice to me, but I hadn’t wanted him to die.
      “I’m sorry, Dit.”
      “Why should you be sorry?” I snapped.  “He was always mean to you.”
      “Don’t say that!” Emma sounded upset.  “Mama says it’s awful bad luck to speak ill of the dead.”
      My mama said that too.
      Emma thought for a moment.  “Bobby liked my mama’s biscuits.  It’s not much nice to say about him, but it’s something.”
      It was true.  Bobby hadn’t been all bad.  I remembered playing marbles with him when we were small and roasting chestnuts and swimming in the Black Warrior.  He’d gotten real quiet when his pa left, and real loud when Emma came to town.  While we were doing the play, I’d thought maybe he was changing again.  Now we’d never know how he would have turned out.  
      “I ain’t never known someone my own age who died,” I said finally.
      “I did,” Emma said.  “A girl in Boston.”  
      “What happened?”
      “She was playing in the street and got hit by a streetcar.”
      “Was she a good friend?”
      “Not really.  But I went to her funeral and played a song on the piano.”
      “Did it make you feel better?” I asked.
      “A little.”
      If Bobby could die, other people I knew could die.  Like Doc Haley.  ‘Course I’d known he’d been sentenced to death, but I didn’t quite believe it, not even after hearing the verdict read.  But now, it suddenly seemed possible.  And that was just too scary to think about.  “It ain’t fair,” I mumbled.  
      “No, it’s not.”  Emma reached out from her bed and took my hand.  Made me feel a little bit better.    
      Mrs. Walker came in carrying a tray of food.  Emma quickly dropped my hand. 
      “Time to eat, dear,” said Mrs. Walker, as she put down the tray and gently shook her husband awake.
      Mr. Walker rubbed the sleep out of his eyes.  “What time is it?”
      “After nine, Sunday evening.”  Mrs. Walker took a bowl of soup from the tray.
      “Sunday!” Mr. Walker exclaimed.  “I’ve got to be in Selma tomorrow for the postal exam.”
      Mrs. Walker shook her head.  “You’re in no condition to go anywhere.”
      “Leah, I’ve got to take that exam.  Without it, there’s no hope of getting a transfer.”
      Mrs. Walker sat down on the bed.  “What time is the exam?”
      “Eight in the morning.”
      “It’s no use.  The last train already left.” 
      Mr. Walker propped himself up on his elbows.  “Why didn’t you wake me sooner?”
      “You’ve been delirious the past three days!”
      “If I don’t get that transfer…”
      “I know what’s at stake here,” Mrs. Walker snapped.  “But I figured I’d rather have my husband alive in Moundville than dead in Boston.”
      “Don’t be so dramatic.  I’m not dying.”
      “But other people are!  I’ve got to wash the bodies for two more funerals tomorrow and…”  Mrs. Walker covered her face with her hands.  “I’m sorry.  I’m just so tired I don’t know what to do.”
      There was a long silence.  It got more and more uncomfortable, ‘til finally I said, “I could drive you to Selma.”
      Mr. and Mrs. Walker turned to look at me.  
      “Dr. Griffith trusts me to drive into Selma to pick up his supplies,” I explained.  “I know the way.”
      Mr. Walker smiled.  “You’d do that for me, Dit?”
      “Sure.”
      Mrs. Walker shook her head.  “No way.  Absolutely not.  I will not let a child drive you all the way to Selma in the middle of the night.”
      “Dit’s not a child,” Emma snapped.  “He’s thirteen!”  
	“And you’ve done so much for our family,” I added.  “I’d be glad to help.”
      In the end, Mrs. Walker gave in.  She had to.  ‘Cause of the flu there really wasn’t anyone else.  







