 48 – FLOUR AND HOT CHOCOLATE

      We got to Selma around six in the morning.  The hotel where the exam was being held was right next to the drug store where Dr. Griffith always bought me lunch.  We parked the car out front, then Mr. Walker went into the lobby to register for the test.  The fever’d finally broke in the night and he seemed a lot better.
      Me and Emma wandered into the steaming kitchen to warm up.  We sat on the radiator shivering, still in our jackets and mittens.  All the guests I had seen in the hotel were white.  All the cooks in the kitchen were colored.  One of them gave us a friendly smile and brought us each a mug of hot chocolate.  
      “Thank you, sir,” said Emma to the cook.
      He nodded and returned to his post.  
      For a moment, we sipped our drinks quietly.  “Emma?” I asked.  
      “What?”
      “You’ll write to me, won’t you?” I asked.  “When you’re back in Boston.”
      “Maybe Daddy won’t pass the test.”
      I gave her a look.  Mr. Walker was as smart as his daughter.
      Emma sighed.  “Yes, I’ll write.”
      “And visit in the summer?” I pressed.
      She shook her head.  “Mama wouldn’t like me coming down south alone.  But you could visit me in Boston.”
      I’d never been out of Alabama.    
      “Or maybe we’ll move to Virginia,” suggested Emma.
      “Richmond,” I answered confidently.
      “Or Connecticut.”
      “Hartford.”
      “Or New York.”
      “New York City?” I asked.
      “Albany.”
      “I knew that,” I said with a smile.  We sipped our hot chocolates.  The cook made the hotel’s morning bread, dumping empty flour sacks onto the floor.  
      “Nothing’s gonna change, is it?” I asked.  Sounded like there was a frog in my throat.
      Emma turned towards me.  “Dit, everything’s going to change.”
      I didn’t look at her.  Just stared at my hot chocolate.  It was thick and sweet, made with real chocolate and milk.  Just the color of the skin on Emma’s cheek.  “Why’d you do that?”
      “Do what?” she asked.
      I touched my cheek.
      “Oh,” exhaled Emma.  “I don’t know.”
      I finished my hot chocolate.  The cook came over to take our mugs.  “Where you kids from?” he asked.
      “Moundville,” Emma replied.
      “Moundville,” the cook repeated, when he returned to pounding the rising bread.  “Ain’t that where that Negra murdered the sheriff?”
      “It wasn’t murder,” I snapped, “it was self-defense.”
      “Really?” asked the cook.  “They didn’t put that in the papers.”
      “We were there,” Emma insisted.  
      The cook shook his head.  “You kids,” he mumbled to himself.  “Active imagination.”  He emptied more bags of flour into a huge vat.  The flour filled the air like a white fog.  Like the mist that had surrounded us the night before when Emma gave me my first kiss.
      Emma abruptly stood up.  “I have an idea.”
      We spent the next hour loading empty flour sacks into my pa’s car.  Emma wouldn’t tell me why, ‘cept to say it was important and it had to do with Doc and she would explain later.  Right when we finished with the sacks, Mr. Walker came out of the hotel.
      “I don’t think I missed a question,” he said proudly.  “They won’t have any reason not to promote me now.”
      That was just what I was afraid of.







