 49 – EMMA’S PLAN

      By the middle of April, everyone in our family was getting better.  We were lucky.  Most families in town had lost at least one family member to the flu.  Mama said it wasn’t luck – it was Mrs. Walker.  “Without her…” Mama just shook her head and didn’t finish the thought.
      Doc Haley discovered one good thing about being in jail – without any contact with other people, he didn’t get sick.  And I was awful glad Doc hadn’t died of the flu, ‘cause Emma had come up with a plan to save his life.  
      We knew we couldn’t just let Doc out of jail.  Everyone would know he was gone, there’d be a big search, he’d probably be caught and we’d get in a whole lot of trouble.  But if everyone thought Doc was dead, there’d be no need to go off looking for him.  And those flour sacks were what gave Emma the idea of exactly how we could fake Doc’s death.  
      But we didn’t have much time.  The hanging was scheduled for the last Saturday in April, less than two weeks away.  Luckily, I knew just who to talk to about getting Doc out of jail.
	“What do you want?” asked Chip, when I pulled him aside at recess.  He’d only been back at school a few days.  He looked the same, just a little thinner, but he seemed different.  He was quieter.  Didn’t joke as much.  Heck he’d even apologized when he showed Mary the big red scar across his belly and accidentally made her cry.  Maybe it was having his appendix out.  Maybe it was Bobby’s death.  In any case, for Doc’s sake, I’d risk trusting him one more time.
      “Nothing much,” I said.  “Just need a little favor.”  
      “Ain’t you still mad at me?” asked Chip.
      “”Cause of that little afternoon in jail?”  I laughed.  “I got no hard feelings about that.”  That wasn’t quite true, but what’s a little white lie if it helped save Doc’s life?  
      “In fact,” I lowered my voice and looked around to see if anyone was listening, “I’d like to borrow the jailhouse key myself.”
      “Why?” asked Chip.  “Does this have anything to do with Doc?”
      “I can’t tell you,” I said, “but if you loan me that key for three hours, I’ll give you my baseball glove for keeps.”
	Chip seemed to think that over.  “Don’t know if I could take the key again,” he said.  “My pa’d get awful mad if he found out.”
	“Since when were you ever scared of getting in trouble?”
	Chip grinned.  
	“Besides,” I continued, “I don’t need it yet.  I’ll let you know the day before.”
	“Your good glove?” Chip asked.
	“All yours.”  I said.
	“Okay,” Chip said finally.  “I could use a little excitement after being stuck in that hospital in Selma.  They put me in the children’s ward!”  
	“You can’t breathe a word of this to anyone.”
	“’Course not!”  Chip replied.
      And so we had a deal.  
	Me and Emma moved onto Dr. Griffith next.  Even though I already had the $2 for the 4th hunt folded up safe in my pocket, I still drove with Dr. Griffith to Selma.  Our monthly trip was a week before the hanging, and this time I asked if Emma could come along.  Soon as we were out of town, we told Dr. Griffith about our plan.  How we were gonna let Doc out with Chip’s key, fake a hanging, and bury flour sacks filled with dirt in the coffin instead.  He listened quietly, but shook his head when we were done.
      “No,” said Dr. Griffith firmly.  “I can’t get involved in something like that.  And you two shouldn’t either.”
      Emma had expected him to be hard to convince, so she had done some reading and found out about this oath doctors took when they finished their training.  I think it was called a “Hippopotamus oath.”  In any case, part of it said, “I will abstain from every voluntary act of mischief and corruption,” and if hanging Doc Haley weren’t mischief and corruption, I didn’t know what was.  But when we reminded Dr. Griffith about the oath, he laughed.
      “That’s just some fancy custom they started in France.  I didn’t take an oath when I graduated from school.”
      “Oh,” said Emma.
      “Still,” Dr. Griffith added, “those are good words to live by.”
      “You gotta help us,” I said.  “You know Doc Haley ain’t done nothing wrong.”
      “A man’s got a right to defend his own life, that’s true enough.  But the law’s the law.  You can’t take justice into your own hands.”
      “We know,” said Emma.  “But that trial wasn’t justice.”
      Dr. Griffith was silent for a long time.  
      “Please, Dr. Griffith,” I said finally.  “Elbert’s my friend.  We can’t just let his father die.”
      Dr. Griffith drummed his fingers on the steering wheel.  “Did you know Mayor Davidson doesn’t like blood?”
      “No,” said Emma.
      “Once he even fainted when one of his boys skinned his knee.  If you could make it look like Doc tried to slit his wrists before deciding to hang himself, I don’t think Mayor Davidson would ask to see the body.”
      “We could do that,” said Emma.
      I held my breath.  
      Finally, Dr. Griffith nodded.  “I’ll talk to Jim Dang-It about hiding Doc ‘til we can get him out of town.  With a change or two, your plan just might work.”

      Six days before the hanging, me and Emma started digging.  We made our cave bigger and wider, shoveling the dirt into a flour sack.  When it was full, Emma pulled out a needle and some thread she had borrowed from her mama.  I sewed the bag shut.  With ten kids, my mama said she didn’t have time to be sewing buttons back on every time we ripped a shirt.  My stitches were big and a little sloppy, but they held the dirt in.  
      We dragged the sack onto my wagon and pulled it to the iron dealer’s place.  The old man looked up from his accounts when we entered.  
      “We need to use your scale,” I said.
      “Don’t let just anyone,” said the old man.  
      “Give you five cents for your trouble,” added Emma.
      The man nodded and heaved the bag of dirt onto the scale.  Emma handed over the nickel.  
      I shook a finger at him.  “And don’t tell us it weighs ten pounds.”  
      The iron dealer laughed, but he read the scale carefully.  “Twenty-seven,” he said.  
      If Doc weighed about 160 pounds, that meant we needed five more bags.  I had finally found a use for long division.
      Three days before the hanging, our hands were full of blisters from digging and our cave was twice the size it was before, but we finally had all the bags filled and hidden behind some bales of hay in our barn.  Mr. Fulton brought the coffin to the jailhouse that same day.  I thought it was awful rude to put it right outside the cell where Doc could see it.  But I guess if you were gonna die, you’d have more important things to worry about than looking at your own coffin.  
      Two days before the hanging, I went to set some rabbit snares in the broom sage patch.  Emma promised to leave them alone this time.  Also told Chip we’d need the key Friday night.
      That left us with one day just to sit and wait.






