 53 – FREEING DOC HALEY

      I didn’t really believe Mrs. Pooley had helped us ‘til the key turned in the lock and the prison door slid open.  Doc Haley was sitting on his cot watching us.  We stared at each other.  Our candles made big shadows on the wall.  Doc made no move to cross the open threshold.
      “Quick,” Emma said.  “Jim Dang-It’s going to hide you until you can get out of town.”
      “But...” Doc started to protest.
      “We’ll explain later,” Emma whispered.  “Go.”
      Doc nodded and brushed past us, disappearing up the stairs.
      Soon as Doc was gone, me and Emma stripped the sheet from the cot.  It was old, but it had a tough hem.  I had to cut the edges with my pocketknife so we could tear it into long pieces.  We quickly knotted the pieces together, making a thick rope.  We had studied pictures of a hangman’s noose in a book at Emma’s house and practiced with an old sheet in our cave, so I thought it would be easy.  But our hands shook at every noise and the minutes stretched out like an old sweater as we struggled to form the make-shift rope into the right shape.  Finally, it was done.  The noose lay on the floor of the cell, still as an albino snake.  
      Next, I took the rabbit from the basket.  It quivered in fear, its dark eyes huge in the candlelight.  “Do you have to kill it?”  Emma asked.
	“Dr. Griffith said we needed blood,” I reminded her.  “The rabbit was your idea.”
	She nodded and looked away.
	With a snap, I broke the rabbit’s neck.  It twitched for a moment, then hung limp as an old hat, warm in my hands.  Quickly I began to skin it.  When I was through, I put the hide aside, and took the bloody rabbit meat and rubbed it all over the white noose.
      Finally, Emma dipped the sheets in the outhouse bucket.  That was real disgusting, but Emma had read that sometimes people peed on themselves when they were hung, and we wanted to make things as realistic as possible.  
      The noose was a dripping, stinking mess by the time I boosted Emma onto my shoulders.  Emma pulled away bits of plaster from the old ceiling ‘til she found a beam.  She looped the filthy sheet over it and tied the noose tight.  We both hung from the rope, making sure it could hold our weight.
      Next, we dragged the cot over so it was under the noose - as if Doc had used it to boost himself to the ceiling.  Emma suggested we tip it on its side, as if Doc had kicked it over once he decided to hang himself.  Finally, we wiped some blood onto an old, rusty nail, threw the nail on the floor, and stood back to look at our work. 
      “I’d believe he killed himself,” said Emma.  
      “Me too.”  But I hoped it would fool the people who mattered.  
      The coffin was waiting in the hall.  Me and Emma dragged it into the small room next to the jail cell that was used for a morgue.  We struggled to lift it onto the flat table.  It wasn’t really heavy, just awkward ‘cause of its size.  Then we ran back to my pa’s barn.  The bags were too heavy for us to carry, but Emma could pull one in my wagon and I could push two in Pa’s wheelbarrow.  We thought we could move them all in just two trips 
      The first trip went fine, ‘cept for a raccoon that scuttled across Main Street and scared us half to death.  We were almost back to the jail with our second load, and I was just beginning to think we might pull this off, when Uncle Wiggens wandered into the street.
      “Who there?” he called out, his words slurred.  
      Emma ducked behind a tree, but I didn’t move fast enough.  “Is that you, Dit?”
      I nodded.  Something was strange about him.  
      “What you doing out so late at night?” he asked.  
      “Nothing.”  I figured out what was strange.  “Where’s your leg?” I asked.  His leg ended at the knee and he was hopping along on one leg and his cane.
      “Left it at home,” said Uncle Wiggens.  “Always do when I’m sleepwalking.  My daughter warned me about drinking a whole bottle of whiskey in one sitting.  But I was never one to let a woman tell me what to do.”
      “Yeah.  Me neither.”  
      “Well,” said Uncle Wiggens, “I’d best get on home before I wake up.”
      “Yeah.”  
      “Being out without my leg and all.”
      “That would be embarrassing.”
      “Sure would.  Sure would.”  Uncle Wiggens mumbled to himself as he wandered off.  “General Lee always said, if you ain’t got all your supplies, don’t ride into battle.  ‘Course he meant bullets, but he wouldn’t have liked us going off without our legs neither.  ‘Course most of us have our legs buttoned on, but…”  
      When he was finally gone, Emma stepped out from behind the tree.  “You could have helped me,” I said, heart pounding.		
      “I thought you did pretty well on your own.”  She giggled, and for a moment, I forgot what we were doing and giggled too.  






