 54 – A NIGHT IN JAIL

      One by one we lugged the bags down the stairs and lifted them into the open coffin.  I got the rabbit skin from the other room and threw it in the coffin as well.  Then Emma put in a hammer and a handful of nails we had stolen from my pa’s tool shed and closed the lid. 
      “Do you think it’ll work?” Emma asked.
      “’Course it will.”  But even I could hear the uncertainty in my voice.    
      We made our way up the stairs and out of the courthouse.  “What time is it?” Emma wondered.
	I looked up at the stars.  “About three, I think.”
	“I better get home.”
	“Yeah,” I said.  I handed her the basket with the dead rabbit and reminded her to throw it to our dogs on the way home.  I could see the silver key clutched in her left hand.  She played with it absently, sliding it between one finger after another.
	“Sure you don’t want me to stay with you?” she asked.  
	“Emma,” I sighed.  “If someone finds me here, I can make up a lie and they might believe me.  But if you’re here too, we don’t have a chance.”
	She nodded.  We’d been over this a million times.  But the truth was, I didn’t want her to leave.  We stood next to each other in the starlight, and I felt her rest her head on my shoulder.  I put an arm around her waist.  She didn’t pull away.  We stood like that for a long time.  
	“Dit?” Emma said softly.
	“Yes?”
	“Whatever happens, we did the best we could.”
      I nodded.  
      She kissed my cheek.  I turned to see her face, but she wriggled away and hurried down Main Street.  
      I went back inside the jail and lay down on the floor in the room with the coffin.  It was cold, lying on the hard stone floor.  I could hear little claws clattering over the old stones – the rats Chip and Bobby had promised would eat my bones.  Bobby was dead now.  Guess the rats would eat him first.  
      Right now, Emma was taking the key back to Mrs. Pooley.  We had promised to leave it under the mat to her back door.  But what if someone saw Emma slipping into Mrs. Pooley’s yard?  Or if Mrs. Pooley changed her mind and told on us?  All I could do was sit and wait.  
      Dr. Griffith was coming first thing in the morning to get Doc Haley ready for the execution.  It was really the job of the sheriff, but we didn’t have one no more, and no one wanted to hire another.  ‘Cept for Jim Dang-It, Dr. Griffith was the only grown-up who knew about our plan.  
      And even though Dr. Griffith had agreed to help us, I couldn’t help worrying as I lay on the floor under the table, beneath the coffin filled with dirt.  The darkness was thick as pea soup.  It pressed on me.  My stub of a candle had long since burned out.  I began to imagine I was Doc Haley, going to be hung in the morning.  A cold panic crept up my throat.  What if Dr. Griffith didn’t show up?  I forced the thought away.
      
      I must have fallen asleep, ‘cause suddenly there was sunlight streaming in through the small window near the ceiling.  I heard voices and jumped to my feet.  
      Dr. Griffith was supposed to get the key from Mayor Davidson and come alone.  He would “discover” the body, then I would just happen to come along on a morning walk and help him cut Doc Haley down.  Least that was the story we were gonna tell everyone.  By the time anyone else arrived, the “body” would be safely in the coffin, closed and nailed shut, so that no one would have to see the horrible sight.  So why did I hear voices?  Something had gone wrong.  I climbed onto the table next to the coffin and peaked out the tiny window.  
      Mayor Davidson was standing with Dr. Griffith at the top of the stairs that led down to the jail.  Dr. Griffith was real pale.  “You really don’t have to come down with me,” I heard him say.  “I can get Doc ready alone.”
      “Nonsense,” Mayor Davidson replied.  “I’m up, excited, and looking forward to the hanging.  I don’t mind coming down to give you a hand.”  He moved towards the stairs.  Dr. Griffith put a hand out to block him.  
      “Larry,” Dr. Griffith said firmly.  “I shouldn’t tell you this, but...”
      “What?”
      “Doc Haley don’t like you too much.”
      Mayor Davidson laughed.  “I don’t like him neither.”
      “He’s a little unbalanced, what with the hanging today and all.  Yesterday, I promised him I’d come get him ready alone.”
      “A promise to a murderer don’t mean nothing.”
      “I know.  I just want to go down first to warn him that you’re coming.  We’ve got to put on the cuffs and the ankle chains so he can walk up to the hanging.  That could be difficult if he’s agitated.  And if you show up unexpected, he’s going to get agitated.”
      “All right,” Mayor Davidson snapped.  “You go down and put the chains on, then come up and get me.  Don’t want no trouble.  Though I don’t know when you became so soft-hearted.”
      “Thank you, Larry.” 
      “Five minutes,” Mayor Davidson said.  He took a large silver key out of his pocket and handed it to Dr. Griffith.  “Then I’m coming down.”   
      Dr. Griffith hurried down the stairs.  






