 55 – WHERE’S MY PA?

      I met Dr. Griffith at the bottom of the stairs.  He was staring at the empty cell.  “You did a good job,” he said.  “If I didn’t know better, I’d say he’d really hung himself.”   He paused and sniffed the air.  “The urine was a nice touch.”
      “Emma’s idea,” I said.
	Dr. Griffith turned and went back up the stairs.  I ran back to my perch on the table to listen.  
      “Doc’s dead,” Dr. Griffith panted, as if he had run up the stairs two at a time.
      “What?”  Mayor Davidson turned white.  
      “Looks like he slit his wrists with an old nail, and when that didn’t work, he stripped the sheet from the bed and hung himself.”
“Oh my God!”  Rivulets of sweat began to stream down Mayor Davidson’s fleshy face.
“Is there blood?”  
Dr. Griffith nodded.  “Lots.”
“Oh.”  Mayor Davidson looked like he was gonna be sick.
      “Would you go get Mrs. Walker?” asked Dr. Griffith.  “I need someone to help me cut Doc down and put him in the coffin.”
      “I can do it,” said Mayor Davidson, clearly hoping Dr. Griffith would say no.  
      Dr. Griffith shook his head.  “It’s a messy job.  You’ll ruin your suit.  There’s no need for that. Best get Mrs. Walker.  She’s a nurse and used to this kind of thing.”
      Mayor Davidson quickly agreed and ran off.  
      A minute later, Dr. Griffith joined me in the room with the coffin.  I took out the rabbit skin.  Some of the blood was still wet, and I helped Dr. Griffith rub it all over his hands and clothes.  Finally, we threw the rabbit skin into the coffin, took out the nails and hammer, and Dr. Griffith started to nail the coffin shut.  
      He was just putting in the last nail when Mrs. Walker, Emma, and Mayor Davidson came running.  They saw the bloody noose and the open cell and gasped.  Mayor Davidson bent over, put his hands on his knees and began to gag.  
      “How’d you get the body down?” asked Mrs. Walker.  “Thought you needed my help.”
      “Dit came by early to say good-bye to Doc Haley.  He helped me.”  
      Mrs. Walker took a deep breath.  “Has anybody told Elbert?” she asked.
      “No,” said Dr. Griffith.  
      “I’ll go.”  Mrs. Walker glanced at the cell once more, then turned and left the room.  
      Soon as she was gone, a voice cried out from the stairwell.  “Why I keep seeing these people running back and forth?  I thought the hanging wasn’t scheduled ‘til ten.”  Uncle Wiggens hobbled down the steps and caught a glimpse of the cell.  “I guess someone decided to have the fun a little early.”
      “It was suicide,” said Dr. Griffith grimly. 
      Uncle Wiggens saw me then and broke into a big grin.  He hadn’t shaved in a couple of days and gray bristles were popping up all over his face.  “Dit!” he cried, “you’ll never believe it.  I had the funniest dream about you last night.”
      Oh no.
      “I fell asleep and dreamt that I was walking around town without my leg.”
      “Without your leg?” asked Mayor Davidson.  
      “Yes,” said Uncle Wiggens, “in my dreams I never have my peg leg, ‘though I never have my whole leg neither.  I just sort of hop around.  Wonder why that is?  Think I could at least dream about having both legs again.  Anyway, I dreamt I ran into Dit and guess what he was doing?”
      “What?” asked Mayor Davidson.
      “He was walking around in the dark pushing a...”
      At that moment Elbert burst into the room.  “Is it true?  Is it true?”  He glanced in the cell and fell to his knees.  Mrs. Walker hurried down the stairs, finally catching up with him.  She put a hand on his shoulder.  
      “Where is he?  Where’s my pa?”  Elbert wailed.
      “We put him in the coffin,” said Dr. Griffith.
      Elbert scrambled to his feet.  “I want to see him.”
      “He’s in no condition to be seen, Elbert,” Dr. Griffith said in the kind, quiet voice he used with patients.  “Hanging does terrible things to a man’s body.”
      “I don’t care.  I want to see him.”
      “We’ve already put the nails in the coffin,” I said, cursing myself for not telling him. 
      “Yes,” Dr. Griffith added.  “I really don’t think it’s a good idea.”
      “What are you fools talking about?” Mrs. Walker cried.  “If the boy wants to see his daddy’s body, let him see it!”  
      Dr. Griffith slowly began to pull out the nails, one by one.  I thought desperately.  What were we gonna do?  I looked at Emma.  She shook her head.  Then I had an idea.
      “Wait a second, Elbert,” I said.  Dr. Griffith stopped pulling out the nails.  “Why you think your pa killed himself?”
      “I don’t know,” said Elbert, his face a stone mask.  
      “‘Cause he didn’t want the whole town to see him dead, hanging at the end of a rope.  He didn’t want to die publicly.  If you open up his coffin right here letting everybody see, you’re disrespecting his last wishes.”
      Elbert thought for a moment.  “Dit’s got a point.  You all turn around and face the other way.  I’ll open the coffin myself.  I’m family.  I got a right to see.”
      Mayor Davidson looked slightly disappointed, but also slightly relieved.  Dr. Griffith handed Elbert the hammer and we all turned around.  I held my breath, praying he would catch on.  We should have written him a note or something.
      It seemed like it took forever for Elbert to pry up the nails, but it was probably only a couple of minutes.  Finally, I heard the last one tinkle to the ground and heard the squeak of the lid as it was lifted up.
      “Where’s my pa?” Elbert asked.
      I spun around and slammed the lid shut.  
      “Where’s my pa?” Elbert repeated.    
      Emma started crying, loud as a baby with colic.  
      Dr. Griffith shook his head.  “This often happens when the body is so badly mutilated.  It’s why I didn’t want him to look.” 
      Elbert was pale as a corpse himself.  “Where’s my pa?”
      “Your daddy’s moved onto a better place,” said Mrs. Walker kindly.  She moved over to embrace him.  
      “He was a suicide,” said Uncle Wiggens.  “Don’t they go to hell?”
      Mrs. Walker shot Uncle Wiggens a look.  
      “It’s a shame he had to endure seeing the body,” Dr. Griffith added.
      Emma wailed even louder.  Elbert just looked confused.  “But where is...”  I kicked him in the shins.  He gave me a funny look and then everything clicked into place.  “Ohhhhhhh,” he said loudly.  “He’s dead.”
      “Yes.”  Dr. Griffith said.  Elbert began to cry big, fake sobs.  I started to laugh, and had to hide it as a hiccup.  Pretty soon Mrs. Walker was crying too, and Dr. Griffith wiped a few tears of relief from his eyes.  Even Uncle Wiggens joined in.   
Only Mayor Davidson stood by, staring at us like we were a bunch of fools.  “We need someone to identify the body for the death certificate,” said Dr. Griffith finally.  
      “I can do that,” Elbert gasped between fake sobs.  “He’s all messed up, but he sure is my pa.”	







