 56 – GOOD-BYE, DOC HALEY 

      Dr. Griffith ran home to get his papers.  Me, Elbert, and Dr. Griffith put our names on the death certificate, then Mayor Davidson signed it, making it official.  Doc Haley was dead.
      We had the funeral two hours later.  Just about the entire town showed up.  My family was there, of course, and Dr. Griffith, the Walkers and all the folks from the Negra church.  Even Mr. Fulton came, wiping his eyes like he forgot he was the one who built the gallows.  Only Mrs. Pooley and Uncle Wiggens stayed away, rocking and smoking on her front porch.
      Reverend Cannon kept the service short.  The women cried a little, then the coffin was buried outside the churchyard in the plot reserved for murderers, fallen women, and suicides.
      Afterwards, me and Emma walked Elbert back to the barbershop.  On the way, we passed Uncle Wiggens standing in front of Mrs. Pooley’s front door.  “Somebody done broke your window,” we heard him call out.
      Me and Emma held our breaths, but Mrs. Pooley only shrugged.  “Nothing was missing.  Must have been the wind.”
      Finally, we reached the barbershop.  “So where is he?” Elbert asked.
      I smiled.  “I heard Jim Dang-It say he was real sorry he couldn’t make it to the funeral.”
      “Why don’t you go pay him a visit?” added Emma.
      Elbert grinned.  
      At home, I stripped off my clothes, and fell into bed.  Just as I put my head down on the pillow, Raymond came in and shook my shoulder. “Why’d I find a bunch of old twine outside your window?”
      “Don’t know what you’re talking about,” I murmured.
      “You didn’t come home last night.”
      I looked up.  “Raymond, you can’t tell anyone.  It’s real, real important.”
      “Then you gotta tell me the whole story.”
      Raymond’s eyes got wider and wider as I told him what we had done, but he didn’t say a word.  Even did my chores for me that day, so I could get some rest.  Guess my older brother had loved Doc Haley too.  
      Chip cornered me the next day after church.  He knew something was going on, but he couldn’t prove it, least not without admitting he’d been stealing his pa’s keys.  I gave him my baseball glove to buy his silence.  We agreed to say he’d won it from me in a game of marbles.  
      Me and Emma went to say good-bye to Doc Haley Sunday afternoon.  We found him in Jim Dang-It’s cabin, sitting by the fireplace with Elbert, drinking a cup of coffee.  “Guess I was wrong,” Doc Haley said.
      “About what?” I asked.  
      Doc Haley smiled.  “’Bout you and Emma being friends.”
      They invited us in and there were hugs and cocoa and lots of mushy stuff like that.  I pulled Elbert aside at one point and told him I was sorry I hadn’t told him about the plan.
      “Dit,” Elbert said with a laugh.  “You saved him.  You can stop apologizing.”  
      Doc Haley left that very night.  Jim Dang-It gave him an old dugout canoe so he could paddle up the Black Warrior.  When he got to Birmingham he planned to ditch the canoe and buy a train ticket.  Elbert had cleared out their savings and Doc had just enough.  The train would take him all the way up North to his cousin in Chicago.  Me and Emma gave Doc our leftover hard tack from the soldiers, so he wouldn’t starve even if he didn’t stop to fish or hunt.  Around midnight we said our good-byes and Doc Haley paddled off into the darkness.  I had the sinking feeling that nothing would ever be as it was before.  






