 57 – GOOD-BYE, ELBERT

      I was right.  It was only a couple of days after Doc Haley left that Elbert asked me to come by the barbershop.  The shop was nearly empty when I arrived, ‘cept for a pair of scissors and a couple of bottles of hair tonic packed in a box.
      “I’m decided to leave Moundville,” Elbert said.  “There are too many memories here.  I’m gonna make a make a fresh start up North.”  He paused.  “Least that’s what I’m telling people.”
      I nodded.  Elbert had acted as the town barber ever since his father was arrested, but everyone could tell his heart wasn’t in it.  His haircuts were uneven and his shaves just about always included a nicked chin.  
      “I asked your pa to sell the barbershop for me and send the money on after he finds a buyer.”
      “Don’t you want to stay and sell it yourself?”
      Elbert shook his head.  “Mr. Walker loaned me enough money for a ticket.  I don’t want to wait any longer.”
      “When are you leaving?”
      “Tomorrow.”
      “Oh,” I said.  “That soon.”
      “Yeah,” Elbert said.  “I’m all packed and ready to go.”
      “Oh,” I said.  “Anything I can do for you?”
      “No,” said Elbert.  “Well, yes.  How about going fishing?”
      It was my last time fishing with Elbert on the Black Warrior and we hardly caught a thing.  We said even less, but somehow, sitting together in the afternoon sun, listening to the birds, I knew we were finally back to being friends.
      
	Me and Emma met Elbert at the station early the next morning.  She had packed a big basket of sandwiches for him so he would have something to eat on the train.  Elbert stood on the platform, clutching the one small suitcase that contained all his possessions.  His face was pinched.  “I don’t have enough,” he burst out when he saw us.  
	“What?” I asked.  
	“They raised the ticket price.  I’m a $1.90 short.”  A whistle blew, as the train started to pull into the station.  “I can’t stay in this town a minute longer,” said Elbert.  “I just can’t.”  His back was bowed like an old man’s.  “I guess I’ll have to get off when my money runs out and hitchhike the rest of the way.”  He’d shaved off his new beard and his naked chin made him look like he wasn’t old enough to cross the street by himself, much less hitchhike to Chicago.  
	I knew what I had to do, but I didn’t want to do it.  I forced my hand into my pocket and pulled out my two dollar bills.
	“I can’t take that,” exclaimed Elbert.  “That’s your 4th hunt money.”
	“No, it ain’t,” I lied.
	“The hunt’s in just over a month,” Elbert said.  “You been saving all year for it.”
	“It ain’t my hunt money,” I insisted.  But we all knew that it was.   
	The whistle sounded again and the conductor called, “All aboard!”  I pressed the money into Elbert’s hand.  It was a man’s hand, callused from hard work, covered with little cuts from when the scissors had slipped.  He whispered thank you, straightened up his back, and I knew he was gonna be okay.  He took the basket from Emma, waved to us both, and climbed onto the train.
	The engine pulled slowly out of the station.  Emma started tapping her toes like she was dancing and I could tell she was about to burst with pride over what I had done, but I didn’t want to hear it.  Elbert stuck his head out the window and for a moment, he looked like my old fishing partner again.  “I’ll pay you back when I get the money from the barbershop!” he called out.
	“Thanks,” I replied, but I knew the money would come too late.  Me and Emma waved as the train picked up speed, waved ‘til it had disappeared down the track.  I had known Elbert my entire life.  I didn’t think I would ever see him again.  

      Life finally returned to something like normal after Elbert left.  We went to school, played ball.  At first it was strange seeing Chip with my glove, but pretty soon, I almost forgot it had ever been mine.  The first time Emma hit the ball in an actual game she was so surprised she dropped the bat and forgot to run.  Pearl had to give her a push to get her moving.  It should’ve been an easy out, but somehow Emma made it safely to first.  She jumped up and down like she’d conquered the world. 
      But things weren’t normal, though if you had asked me, I wouldn’t have been able to tell you what was wrong.  Of course, Doc Haley and Elbert were gone and Bobby and Big Foot were dead, but it was more than that.  Things were shook up, like leaves falling in the spring and flowers blooming in the winter.
      Even skipping stones at the river was different.  Emma kept asking me about the 4th hunt.  “You did the right thing giving Elbert your money,” she said.  “And you’re good at lots of things besides killing things.” 
      “I know,” I said.
      “So why are you so upset you can’t enter?” 
      I threw another stone.  “It was the only way.”
      “The only way to what?”
      “You can’t understand.”
      “Why not?” demanded Emma.  
      “Your mama and daddy hang on your every word.  There are ten of us.”
      “Oh.”  She got real quiet then and didn’t say nothing else.  So maybe she did understand.  Maybe that was why she worked so hard in school.  Maybe she knew all the things I couldn’t find a way to say about making your parents proud, ‘cause she worried about them too.






