 58 – THE LETTER
 
      On the last day of school, the other students quickly packed up their belongings and ran out.  I took my time and made my way over to Mrs. Seay’s desk.  She sure had changed since she’d first arrived in Moundville.  Wore a regular work dress most of the time now.  Her hair was pulled back in a simple bun.  But even without the fancy clothes, she looked just as pretty as before.  “Mrs. Seay?”
      She looked up.  “Yes, Dit?”
      “I have something I need to tell you.”
      “What is it?”  She tugged at the collar of her dress.  
      I swallowed hard.  “I was the one who broke your window.  Last summer, before school started.  I’m real sorry.”  I couldn’t look at her. 
      “Thank you, Dit.”  She paused.  “I accept your apology.”
      I nodded, still staring at the planks on the floor.
      “But I always knew it was you.”
      I looked up.  “How?”
      Mrs. Seay laughed.  “There isn’t anyone else in Moundville who’s got your arm.”  
      “I’d like to pay for it, but…”
      “You can make it up to me by helping in my garden next fall,” Mrs. Seay said firmly.  “Right now, I want you to go home and enjoy your summer.”
      I ran all the way from the schoolhouse to the mounds, feeling lighter than I had since Big Foot’s death.  Me and Emma were meeting in our cave.  It was a lot bigger now, after digging out all that dirt for Doc’s coffin.  We were gonna make it even better this summer – line the floor with stones and maybe build some three-legged stools so we had some real furniture.  But for now, all I wanted was a cool soda and a dip in the river.  Maybe, if they were biting, we’d have fish for supper.
      I ducked into the cave and grabbed a soda.  Emma was already there, clutching a piece of paper.
      “What’s that?” I asked, taking a sip of my soda.
      “A letter,” Emma said.
      “What’s it say?” I asked.
      “My dad passed the test.” 
      “What test?” 
      She looked at me.  I started to choke.   
      “We’re going back to Boston,” Emma said.  
      “Oh.” 
      “We leave in three weeks.  The day of the 4th hunt.”
      The cola burned running down my throat.
      “They’ve already hired a new postmaster.  He’s got twin boys your age.”  
      “Great.”  My stomach felt like it had been kicked by an old mule.
      “Dit, I...”
      “I don’t want to talk about it.”
      “I want to tell you...”
      “Shut up!”  I ran out of the cave and into the forest.  Didn’t stop ‘til my legs were aching.  Finally leaned against a tree and threw up.  When I was finished, I walked on ‘til I found a little stream.  I rinsed out my mouth and sat down under a pine tree.
      I didn’t know where I was.
      Maybe that wasn’t quite true.  I could’ve figured it out if I’d gotten up and looked around.  But I just didn’t care no more.  I wanted to sit on that bed of pine needles forever.
      I sat there all afternoon and evening.  Seemed like if I didn’t move, nothing would change, and Emma would stay in Moundville.  I knew that didn’t make no sense, but still I didn’t move as the sun went down and the stars came out.  Sat ‘til I heard a voice in the moonlight.  
      “Dit, is that you?”  Jim Dang-It stepped over the small stream.  
      “How’d you find me?”
      Jim snorted.  “Left a trail a mile wide.”
      I didn’t say nothing.
      “Your mama’s worried herself sick.  Get up and get your dang self home.”
      Slowly, I stood up.  My stomach ached ‘cause I hadn’t eaten anything, and my legs stung from tiny cuts I got running through the underbrush.  Jim clutched my arm so tight it hurt and we started walking home.  
      After a while Jim’s grip on my arm softened.  “You know Dit,” he said in a quiet voice, “when my wife died I was real angry.  Angry at the old doctor who wouldn’t come ‘cause I didn’t have no money.  Angry at God for taking her away.”
      Jim paused to make sure I was listening.   
      “But after a while, I thought of something worse than losing my wife.”
      “What?” I asked.
      “If I’d never met her at all.”
      We walked the rest of the way in silence.  Mama was pacing back and forth on the front porch when we arrived home.  Soon as she saw us, she ran down the front steps and threw her arms around me.
      “I was so worried, Dit!” Mama cried.  “Don’t you ever run off like that again!”
      And that was when I finally started to cry.  






