 60 – THE POSTCARD

	For the next three weeks Emma helped me with my chores so we could spend every waking moment together.  When the cows were milked and the garden weeded, we went hiking in the woods and fished on the Black Warrior.  We played baseball and drank root beer on Mrs. Pooley’s front porch and talked about Emma’s books.  Me and Emma skipped stones, tossed balls of yarn for the kittens, and borrowed Pa’s car for a joyride.  Only thing we didn’t do was talk about her leaving.
      The afternoon of July 3rd, Reverend Cannon organized a good-bye picnic for the Walkers.  I went of course.  There were rows of tables set up outside the wooden church and enough food for everyone in Selma.  Most of the guests were colored, though my whole family stopped by. Dr. Griffith and Mrs. Seay did too.  Even Jim Dang-It showed up, said good-bye to Emma, and left without saying a word to anyone else.
      Don’t remember much about that afternoon.  I was trying so hard not to think about what was happening the next day, I didn’t even notice what I ate or who I talked to.  Emma was busy saying good-bye to everyone else and didn’t have much time for me.  And so before I knew it, just about everyone had gone home and Mrs. Walker was packing a basket of leftovers to take on the train.
      I was just about ready to head on home myself, when Emma raced up to me and grabbed my arm.  “I got something to show you, Dit.”
	“What?”
	“Oh no.  Not here.”  Emma shook her head.  “Race you to the top of our mound.”
	So we ran through the forest and up to the top of our mound.  It was so easy for Emma now she didn’t even have to look where she was going.  Didn’t have to think about avoiding the pricker bushes ‘cause she knew where they all were, and if a new one had grown up overnight, well it didn’t matter ‘cause she had calluses on her hands.  She still wore a dress and fancy shoes, but both were patched now and she didn’t seem to care.  Emma scrambled up the hill ahead of me and a gust of wind blew a red ribbon from her hair.  I stopped to pick it up.
	When I finally reached the top, Emma was laughing.  “I beat you!  I finally beat you.”
	“Yeah, you sure did.”
	Emma put her hands on her hips.  “Did you let me win?”
	“No.  Why would I do that?”
	Emma smiled.
	“You lost this,” I said, holding out the ribbon.
	“You keep it,” said Emma.  “I got a million more.”
	The sun was just beginning to set and had turned everything golden, like a film of oil floating on the water.  I put the ribbon in my pocket and asked, “What did you want to show me anyway?”
	Emma pulled a small card out of the pocket of her dress and handed it to me.
	I looked carefully at the card.  On one side was a picture of a tall building.  Below it, in printed letters was the word Chicago.  I turned the card over.  It was addressed to Dit Sims and Emma Walker of Moundville, Alabama.  There was a small note next to the address: Both arrived safe.  Thanks again. 
	I looked up at Emma.  She was smiling.  “We did it.  They’re free.”
	“I guess they are.”  I looked down at the card in my hand.  Never knew you could feel happy and sad at the same time, but I did, like someone was pulling my heart in two different directions.  Maybe that’s why I finally found to the words to ask, “Emma, why do you have to leave?”  
      “Dit, I...”  She shook her head.  
      “If only I hadn’t given your daddy a ride to Selma…”
      “…we would’ve never have found the flour sacks.”  Emma finished.  “And without the sacks we might not have come up with the plan.”   
      “And Doc would’ve died.”
      Emma nodded.  “It was worth it, Dit.”
      “But you’re my best friend.”
      “I know.  And you’re mine.”
      I handed the card back to her.  “You keep it.  So you can remember what we did together.”
      “Don’t need a card to remember that.”  But she took the postcard, folded it carefully, and stuck it back in her dress pocket.
      “I’ll miss you,” I said.
      “I’ll miss you too,” Emma replied.  
      The sun was almost down now and the fireflies were out, twinkling on and off like tiny floating stars.
      “Can I kiss you good-bye?” I asked.
      Emma nodded.
      So I did.  Right on the lips and everything.  I probably should say it was gross or something.  But it was actually kind of nice.  
      Then we joined hands and walked down our mound together, one last time.  







