 7 – THE FISHING TRIP
      
      Every summer, Pa takes me fishing.  I look forward to this trip all year since it’s just about the only time I get to talk to Pa all by myself.  I was so excited I could barely concentrate as I packed all the supplies.  Ulman and Raymond said thirteen was the year Pa gave you the man-to-man talk.  My birthday wasn’t until February but I figured Pa might forget and give me the talk a little early.
      The morning of our trip dawned crisp and clear - the perfect day for a fishing trip.  We didn’t get a real early start ‘cause Pa had been up half the night nursing a sick cow, but we set off right after breakfast.  We were going to my favorite fishing hole, a short drive from town.  
      Pa had a Model-T Ford, with a cloth top to put up when it rained.  There were only three cars in town: my pa had one, Dr. Griffith had one to help him make his rounds, and Mayor Davidson bought a car ‘cause he couldn’t stand to be outdone by anyone.  Pa kept promising to teach me to drive just soon as he got a chance.    
        We had to follow a dirt track off the main road to get to the fishing hole.  You had to know where it was or you’d never find it.  So my jaw just about fell off its hinges when we drove up to the riverbank and found Emma and her daddy sitting on a log.
      “What are you doing here?” I yelled as I scrambled out of the car.
      “Dit,” Pa said sharply.
      “We’re fishing,” said Emma.  She clutched the fishing rod with both hands.
      “How’d you ever find this place?” asked Pa.  
      Mr. Walker cast out his line.  I could tell he knew how to fish, even if his daughter didn’t.  “I asked Dr. Griffith to recommend a good fishing hole, and he brought us here.” 
      “Oh,” Pa replied.  
      “He drove into Selma for the day and dropped us off.”  Mr. Walker explained.  “We’ll just hitch a ride home.”
      “I see,” said Pa.  
       “As a boy, I did a lot of fishing.  I wanted to show Emma what it was like.  Seems like you had the same idea with your son.”
      Me and Pa stood there for a long moment.  I waited for Pa to tell them to leave.  “Well,” Pa said slowly, “there’s plenty of fish here for all of us.”
      So much for my man-to-man talk.
      We sat down on the old log that stretched across the creek.  Pa and Mr. Walker each sat on one end of the log.  Me and Emma were in the middle, far enough apart so we wouldn’t accidentally bump into each other.  
      No one moved for a long time.  
      “Well,” Pa said finally.  “How’s it working out at the post office?”
      “Just fine, sir,” said Mr. Walker.
      Pa chuckled.  “No need to call me sir.  Though there is some men in town who stand on ceremony.”
      Mr. Walker nodded.  “Dr. Griffith told me.”
      “I’m not sure why we need a lawman myself,” said Pa.  “In a town this small seems we should be able to manage things ourselves.  But others felt differently, and well, there we are.”
      Mr. Walker nodded.
      “I just don’t want you to have any trouble,” Pa said.  “I’m getting used to getting my mail on time.”
      Mr. Walker finally smiled then.  “I heard the last postman had a few shortcomings.”
      “A few shortcomings?  Shoot, the only thing that was short about him was the time he was sober every day.”
      Mr. Walker grinned again.  “Glad to hear I’m doing better.”
      Maybe it wouldn’t be such a bad day after all, even if I didn’t get my talk.  A moment later Emma’s pole began to jerk and wiggle.  
      “I caught a fish!” squealed Emma.
      She tried to reel in the line, but didn’t know how.  I grabbed the pole to help.
      “Let me do it!” she protested.
      But I already had the fish out of the water.  It was a large perch.  “Where’s the net?” I asked, as the fish squirmed wildly in the air.
      “I thought you brought it,” Pa said.  
      I guess I should’ve done a better job packing.
      “I always just use some extra line to string up the fish,” said Mr. Walker.
      I looked around.  “Don’t need it,” I said.  “There’s a rocky pool under that bridge.  Fish can’t get out of that.”  I picked up the squirming fish and dropped it into the pool.
      Problem solved.  For a while, the fish were coming as fast as we could pull them in.  Pa got a big perch, and then Mr. Walker caught a huge catfish.  I caught one of each and Emma reeled in a small carp all by herself.
      She proudly slid off the log and walked under the small footbridge.  She dumped the fish into the pool and then leaned over to look in the water.
      But there weren’t no other fish in the pool. Her fish swam around a bit dazed.  “The other fish got away,” she said.
      “Couldn’t have,” said Mr. Walker.  “Take another look.”
      Emma leaned over again.  Now her fish was gone too, ‘cept for its tail sticking out of the end of a large water moccasin.  
      The water moccasin is a dark snake with a yellow stomach, a triangular head and slitty eyes like a cat.  It’s poisonous, and once its jaws snap shut, it don’t let go.  It’s sometimes called a cottonmouth, ‘cause when its mouth is open, the flesh inside its throat is as white as cotton.  The water moccasin is more aggressive than most snakes and territorial too.  And we had invaded its home.
      Emma didn’t know all this.  But she did know enough to scream, “Snakes!”
      I ain’t never seen a man move so fast.  Mr. Walker jumped up and stomped to the edge of the pool.  Sure enough, there were no fish, but five large water moccasins were slithering out of the water.
      Before me or Pa could move, Mr. Walker pulled out a pistol and fired.  Emma put her hands over her ears and ran back towards the log.  
      Guess Mr. Walker didn’t fire a pistol too often back in Boston, ‘cause even though he was only a foot away, he didn’t hit none of the snakes.  ‘Course it is awful hard to kill a snake by shooting – the best way is just to take an axe and chop off its head.  I would have told him this, but before I could, Mr. Walker fired again.  The bullet bounced off a rock and the noise scared the snakes.  They slunk back into the darkness of the pool.
      Emma ran over and hugged her pa.  Mr. Walker was breathing hard as he put down the gun.
      “What you doing shooting off that pistol?” demanded Pa.
      “Protecting my daughter,” said Mr. Walker.  
      “You didn’t even hit none of those old cottonmouths.  Only a fool bring along a gun when he don’t know how to use it.”
      “Don’t you call me a fool!” Mr. Walker snapped.
      “What you gonna do, wave your gun at me?” asked Pa.
      “Don’t be mean to my daddy!” said Emma.
      “Shut up,” I said.  “If my pa calls him a fool, he’s a fool.”
      We all began to yell at once, ‘til we sounded like a chicken house when a fox has broken in.  A huge crack of thunder shut us up.  Soon as I looked up, it began to pour.
      Pa gave a great sigh.  “I think we’d all best go home.”  
      
      By the time we had all the supplies back in the car, it was raining cats and dogs.  If I didn’t know better, I’d say there were a few mules and pigs in there too.  Mr. Walker sat in the front with Pa, and me and Emma climbed in the back.  We put up the top on Pa’s Model T, but we all got soaked anyway.  Every once in a while there’d be a flash of lightning and we’d be able to see clearly for a second or two.  Then the thunder would come with a loud clap and everything would turn dark again.  
      Pa suddenly slammed on the brakes, causing me and Emma to fall hard against the front seat.  When the lightning flashed again, we saw a huge tree blocking the road, only inches from the hood of our car.  There was no way around it.  
      Pa banged hard on the steering wheel.  Mr. Walker just shook his head. 
      “At least it missed the car,” said Emma.
      “What we gonna do now?” I asked.    
      Pa thought for a moment.  “Jim Dang-It lives about half a mile from here.  He’ll put us up.”  So we climbed out of the car and started walking.  
      Jim Dang-It was an eccentric old man, half-colored and half-Indian.  He lived in the woods all alone and wouldn’t take no help from no one, not even if all his tobacco crop washed away.  Said he’d rather eat acorns like the squirrels than be beholden to a white man.  But even though he wouldn’t take no help, he was more than happy to give it.  He had saved many folks who had gotten lost in the woods.  Even though I knew all about him, I’d never dared go to his place.  He was the only Negra I knew who could bawl out a white man and not get hurt.
      We were all feeling pretty low as we trudged down the muddy path.  All except Emma.  Despite the rain, she strolled along like it was a sunny spring day.  Once or twice, I even caught her whistling.  When I finally asked her why, for goodness sake, wasn’t she in a foul mood like the rest of us, she only asked, “Is fishing always this exciting?”  I didn’t answer.
      We were wetter than a school of catfish by the time we reached Jim’s cabin.  Pa pounded on his door.
      “What you folks doing out in this dang weather?” Jim Dang-It barked at us as he pulled open the door.  He was a small man, but covered in muscles.  “Come on in.”
      The four of us crowded into his tiny cabin.  Dr. Griffith was standing by the fire.  He smiled broadly as Emma and Mr. Walker walked in.  “Sure am glad to see you two.  I was on my way to see if you needed a ride, when my car got stuck in the mud.”  
      Dr. Griffith was the only doctor in Moundville.  He had a full gray beard and brown eyes that didn’t scold you, even if you did something stupid like jump off the roof of the barn.  (Raymond dared me.  It wasn’t my fault.)  Dr. Griffith just patched you up and sent you home and for that, I liked him.  
      Jim Dang-It took Emma’s wet jacket and draped it over a chair in front of the fire.  “Dr. Griffith worried himself sick about you.”  He brought me and Emma a blanket.  “What kind of dang fools go out when there’s a storm coming?”
      “I didn’t see no signs of a storm,” I said.
      “No signs of a storm!” exclaimed Jim.  “What do they teach you kids these days?  Didn’t you see notice the squirrels hiding and hear the birds singing their storm song?”
      “No,” I said.  
      “Dang stupid,” said Jim, shaking his head.  But he smiled as he said it.
      Jim’s cabin was nothing like I had imagined.  Sure, there was a dirt floor, but it was swept neat as Mama’s.  There was a bed built into one corner and covered with a bright, colored quilt.  His tools were neatly hung on the walls.  Every item had its place.  A pot of coffee boiled over the open fireplace.  
      That night Pa, Mr. Walker, Dr. Griffith and Jim Dang-It sipped coffee and gossiped ‘til late.  There wasn’t no place for all of us to lie down, so Emma got the bed and I slept on the floor.  In the morning, Jim Dang-It even poured me and Emma a cup of coffee.  
      “This was the best fishing trip I’ve ever been on,” said Emma.
      “Emma, it’s the only fishing trip you’ve ever been on,” her daddy pointed out.
      “And probably your last,” said Dr. Griffith.  
      “We didn’t even end up with any fish!” I said.
      But we all laughed, as we drank coffee and watched the sunrise.





