 9 – THROWING STONES

      That evening after dinner, I went to hang out on Mrs. Pooley’s front porch.  Doc Haley sat in one of the rockers, while me and Elbert played marbles in the dirt.  It was a nice, quiet evening, with no one saying much.  After a game and a half, Big Foot wandered out of the store onto his mama’s front porch.  Soon as Doc saw him, he jumped up.
      “Come on, Elbert,” Doc said.
      “I’m right in the middle of a game,” Elbert protested.
      “Sorry, son.  It’s time to go.”
      Me and Elbert divvied up our marbles, and he and Doc went on home.
      Big Foot sat down in the empty chair without saying a word.  
      I headed home soon after that.  It was already dark.  The moon was out, so I could see just fine to practice my pitching, which I did by throwing rocks at each of the houses I passed.  I’d pick a spot, maybe ten inches square, above a door or between two windows, and throw the rock at it.  I’d heard once that was how the great pitcher Walter Johnson had perfected his aim, and ever since, I’d practiced that way myself.
      I hit Dr. Griffith’s place first.  He’d moved to town five or six years ago and his wife died two years after that, so now he lived alone in their large wooden house.  The oak front door made a nice thwunk when my rock hit it.  
      Next to Dr. Griffith’s house was a tiny little cabin that he rented out to the schoolteacher.  We had only one teacher in our primary school, which went from first to eighth grade.  As far back as anyone could remember, the teacher had been Mr. Summons.  But the old man had finally died - choked on a fish bone while he was eating his supper.  His housekeeper found him, a pile of ungraded papers under his head.
      So Mrs. Seay had recently moved into the little cabin.  She was a young widow from a rich family who had been educated at the University of Alabama.  Most people said she wouldn’t be a schoolteacher for long; she was too pretty not to get married again.  I hadn’t met her yet, but had heard Mama gossiping about her.  So I crept up to the window to see what she was like.
      I guess she hadn’t had time to hang her curtains, ‘cause I could see her clearly, reading by the fireside.  She sure was pretty.  Her long blonde hair was braided and pinned high up on her head.  Her dress had lace all over it, and looked more suited to a fancy party than sitting at home reading a book.  ‘Round her neck she wore a string of pearls.  
	I could even see the book she was reading: Democracy and Education by one John Dewey.  What kind of foolishness was that?  Ain’t no democracy in school.  Everyone knows that.  The teacher is boss and if you forget that, you’re gonna end up with one sore bottom.
      I’d seen enough, so I moved a couple of steps back and took aim at a little dark patch on the wood above her window.  I pulled my arm back.  Then right before I let the stone fly, Emma stepped out of the darkness.
      It was exactly the wrong moment to surprise me: too late for me to stop my throw, but early enough to distract me.  Instead of bouncing harmlessly off the wood, the rock sailed through the closed window, shattering the glass.
      We both winced and ran for the bushes.  Peaking through the leaves, we could see Mrs. Seay pick up a kerosene lamp and walk towards the front door.  The door opened and she stepped outside.  “Who’s there?” she called sharply.  Her long dress billowed in the night breeze.
      Emma took a deep breath, like she was gonna say something, but I grabbed her shoulder.  She shut up.  Mrs. Seay walked right by the bush where we were hiding, scanned the yard twice, then went back inside.
      I let out a sigh of relief and let my grip on Emma relax.  She squirmed away.  “You shouldn’t be throwing rocks at people’s houses.”
      “It’s your fault,” I spit back at her.  “If you hadn’t startled me, I wouldn’t have broke her window.” 
      “You have to go tell her what you did.”
      “No!” I whispered through clenched teeth.  “Are you crazy?”
      “Then I will.”  She brushed the dirt off her dress.
      “Emma, you can’t tell,” I pleaded.
      “Why not?”
      “I’m saving money for the 4th hunt.  I can’t afford to pay for a broken window.”
      “Should have thought of that before you broke it.”  Emma stood up and looked over towards the front door.  
      “I’ll tell everyone you’re a snitch.”
      “So?” Emma replied.
      “None of the kids will want to play with you.”
      “None of the kids play with me anyway.”
      “I do.”
      “Only cause your mama makes you.”
      I wanted to say that wasn’t true, but it was.  So I finally just said, “Please don’t tell.” 
      Emma pretended to think for a long moment, but I think she already had the whole thing worked out in her head.  “Teach me to throw a ball and I won’t tell.”
      “Emma,” I sighed.  “You ain’t no good at baseball.”  
      “I want to learn.”
      I shook my head.  
      “Fine.”  She started towards Mrs. Seay’s front door.
      “Wait,” I said.  
      Emma paused.  “Teach me to throw a ball,” she repeated, “and I’ll keep your secret.”
      I looked up at the broken window.  Mrs. Seay was inside, sweeping up the glass shards.  I looked back at Emma and nodded. 
      
      The next day, me and Emma spent hours on the banks of the Black Warrior River, throwing small smooth stones.  “I don’t want to learn to throw stones,” Emma protested.  “I want to throw a baseball.”
      “You gotta learn how to keep your eye on the ball,” I explained.  “And how to throw and how to aim.  And the best way to learn all that is by skipping stones.”
      She didn’t complain no more after that.  
      My stones would skip across the water like they was flying.  Hers would fall in the water with a loud ker-plunk.  
      But I gotta give her one thing.  That girl was stubborn.  I tried for three hours to show her how it was done, and she never got more than one skip.  I thought that was the end of it.  If Chip didn’t catch on to something right away, he called it stupid and gave up.  
      So I was surprised when Emma came over the next day.  She watched us weed the vegetable garden, ‘til Mama stopped and asked her what she wanted.  “Dit was teaching me to skip stones yesterday, Mrs. Sims.”  
      “Did you get the hang of it?” Mama asked, wiping her hands on her apron.
      “No, Mrs. Sims.  It was my first time, since I wasn’t allowed to go down to the river by myself in Boston.”
      “Well then,” said Mama, “sounds like you need yourself another lesson.”  
      Three more hours on the riverbank and Emma’s stones still fell flat into the water.  The whole thing seemed pointless to me.  I knew there was no way Emma was ever gonna learn how to skip stones.  But I didn’t want her to tell on me, so I guess I had to keep trying to teach her.  Sooner or later, she’d decide to give up on her own.    
      “You’re getting it,” I lied.
      “No, I’m not,” said Emma.  
      “You’re not holding the stones right,” I said for the fifth time.
      “Show me again,” said Emma.
      So I took her hand in mine and wrapped it around a smooth flat stone.  Her fingers were cool and stiff, but her skin was beautiful, kind of like the mud in a creek after a hard rain.  I rubbed her hands between mine, trying to get the blood running.  She watched me.  Then I said, “Try it again.”
      She took that stone and threw it so hard, it skipped 7 or 8 times across the water.  We both stood there with our mouths open.  I’m not sure who was more surprised.  
      “Oh Dit, you did it!” she exclaimed.  “You taught me to throw stones.”
      “I didn’t do nothing,” I said.  “You figured it out yourself.”
      But it made me feel good that she’d said it.  And I started to do some thinking.  Taking Emma to the top of my mound hadn’t gotten rid of her.  She hadn’t cried on the fishing trip, not even when we had to walk through the rain and the mud to Jim Dang-It’s.  Now Emma had gone and learned how to skip stones, when I had thought she couldn’t.  Maybe there was other stuff I was wrong about too.  Maybe Emma was someone who’d make a good friend.  
      While I was thinking and wondering, Emma picked up another stone and threw it as hard as she could.  It fell into the water with a loud ker-plunk.  She just laughed and picked up another stone.  This one skipped 4 or 5 times.  Emma let out a delighted scream.
      We stood there ‘til the sun went down, skipping stones.  







