 1
I Have (Not So Much) Confidence
It was just a metal detector. You know, the normal kind they have at airports to make sure no one smuggles a gun or a bomb or an iguana onto a flight. Millions of people go through them every day without a problem: old people, babies, pregnant women. But I couldn’t shake the feeling that it was actually a cancer-causing death trap.
    Come on! you’re probably saying. Everyone knows they’re safe.
    But everyone used to think that X-ray machines at shoe stores were safe. My dad told me this story of how he took a bazillion photos of the bones in his foot one summer. And then that fall, his left baby toe got a wart, and he had to have surgery. Coincidence? I think not.
    Okay, so maybe that’s not the best example. In Doomsday Journal #2, page 14, I have a section on how warts are caused by viruses caught by touching contaminated surfaces, such as a locker-room floor—or an X-ray machine used by every kid in town. And metal detectors don’t use X-rays; they actually use non-ionizing radiation, but that’s beside the point.
    The point is, I wanted to go visit my father in Austria. He’d moved there four months earlier. I missed him. A lot. But if I wanted to see him, I had to walk through the metal detector.
    Unfortunately, my brain overreacts sometimes. It tells me that many, many things are dangerous, and not things that lots of people think are scary, like making new friends or public speaking or math tests. I’m actually okay with all of those. No, my brain tells me I should avoid certain things that most people believe are safe. Like metal detectors.
    Of course, logically I understood my fear didn’t make much sense. But I still didn’t want to walk through that beeping monstrosity. I could practically see the rays zapping each person who walked through, mutating harmless freckles into skin cancer. The line got shorter and shorter. I started gulping down air, trying to catch my breath.
    “Are you all right, Becca?” my mom asked.
    She was flying to Austria with me. Not to see my father—they’d been happily divorced for years—but so she could take a summer backpacking trip through Europe. I was glad she was traveling with me, but I was also a little embarrassed. I mean, I was twelve. I should have been able to get onto a plane by myself. All I had to do was sit there. My friend Chrissy started flying to Atlanta by herself each summer to see her grandparents when she was eight. But we all knew there was no way I’d be able to get on a plane alone.
    Planes. Sometimes they crash and explode. No, I can’t think about that now. I have to get through the metal detector first.[JL1][KL2]
    “Yes,” I squeaked. “I’m fine.”
    Mom knew I was lying. She took my hand and squeezed it. It was clammy and cold. I tried to distract myself, like Dr. Teresa told me to do. Focus on Austria. Austria. The Sound of Music. Happy children frolicking in the Alps. Doe, a deer, a female deer . . . and . . . and . . .
    Suddenly, we were at the front of the line. Mom moved smoothly and efficiently, like a cat, carefully putting her purse and backpack onto the conveyor belt. My joints felt stiff, my arms and legs suddenly too long, as I struggled to pull off my backpack and place it in the bin. I lumbered back to our spot in line, as if I were Pinocchio right after he came to life.
    “Do you want to go first, sweetie?” Mom asked.
    I shook my head.
    “Come on, ma’am,” the guard called. “Please step on through.”
    Mom squeezed my hand one last time and walked away. A moment later, she was through. My mom stood ten feet in front of me, her black slacks job-interview crisp, her dark hair as sleek as if she had just come from a salon. We were separated only by a stupid metal gate, but it felt as if she were a million miles away[JL3].
    “Kid!” The guard sounded less patient now. “You’re clear to walk through.” I had pulled my curly hair back into a ponytail, but I could feel how wisps in front had fallen out and were now sticking to my forehead. There was sweat running down the small of my back; it was July[JL4][KL5] and hot outside but so cold in the airport the air-conditioned air made my teeth hurt. And my heart was beating louder than a jet engine. I kept gasping for air, but I couldn’t seem to get any oxygen. I started to feel dizzy.
    “Come on!” There was a teenager behind me, clutching a skateboard. He rolled his eyes. “You’re holding up the line!”
    I saw my mom gesture to the guard and whisper something to him. I stared at my Keds. I knew what she was saying. My daughter has an anxiety disorder. Sometimes she has panic attacks and . . .[JL6][KL7] It was so embarrassing!
    The boy behind me gave me a push. I stumbled and almost fell, and by the time I regained my footing, I realized I had taken the few steps through the metal detector and it was over.
    I burst into tears. The boy behind me started laughing, and I ran toward the bathroom. I locked myself in a stall and leaned against the cold metal, shaking, not quite sure if I was going to throw up. A minute later, I heard someone else walk in and my mother call, “Becca! Becca!”
    “I’m here,” I whispered, peeking out through the cracks in the door. My mother was struggling to carry both backpacks and her purse. One strand of her hair was out of place. The bathroom was mercifully deserted.
    “You did it,” Mom said.
    “I made a huge scene!”
    “It doesn’t matter,” she said. “You’re through.”
    “But . . .” I sniveled. “Do I have cancer?”
    “Oh, Becca.” Mom sighed.
    I knew it was ridiculous. But the thought kept bouncing around in my brain. Mom was really good at being patient. She looked in the mirror and combed her fingers through her hair, straightening the one strand[JL8][KL9]. The thought bounced and bounced, like a motorized Ping-Pong ball, until finally, it ran out of steam. I unlocked the door and came out of the stall.
    “Here.” Mom fumbled in her purse. “Let me give you your Benadryl.”
    She pulled out a small pill and handed it to me along with a bottle of water. I didn’t have a cold or an allergy attack, but, as listed on page 3 of Doomsday Journal #1, Benadryl was sometimes also recommended for anxiety. Especially in kids. It was 1993, for goodness’ [SB10]sake; you’d think they would have invented something better by now! I didn’t like taking it—it made my head feel fuzzy and my mouth dry—but I wasn’t even on the plane yet, and I was freaking out. I really didn’t have a choice.
    I felt better as soon as I’d swallowed it. I knew there was no way it could work that fast, but . . . it was part of the plan we’d written out with Dr. Teresa last week. And I wanted to see my father.
    So I splashed some water on my face and patted it dry with a scratchy paper towel. We went to McDonald’s and each got a Quarter Pounder and fries and a Diet Coke[JL11][KL12]. And as we ate, I tried not to think about the next thing I was afraid of—getting on the plane.

