 17
Another Item for the Doomsday Journal
That evening, while Dad made spaghetti for dinner, I told him about our day. “Did you know Sara doesn’t have a work permit?”
    “Yes,” he said. “Katarina explained the situation to me before you arrived.”
    “Why didn’t you tell me?” I asked.
    “I didn’t think you’d be interested in her exact legal status,” Dad said, stirring the sauce.
    “Dad!”
    “You worry a lot, Becca,” Dad said seriously. “I didn’t want to give you one more thing to write down in your Doomsday Journal.”
    “It helps me to write things down.”
    “That’s what you and your mother say,” Dad said. “But sometimes I think focusing on all the things that could go wrong just makes you feel worse.”
    Well, that certainly made me feel worse. I guess Dad really did see me as the girl who worried too much. [SB247][KL248]My eyes felt itchy as Dad plated the spaghetti and grated a block of parmesan cheese over the top. We sat down at the tiny table.
    Dad sat upright, his posture perfect, as if he were meeting with a four-star general. I slouched down further in my chair.
    “Becca, don’t pout,” Dad said.[SB249][KL250] He still had his dress shirt on, his tie loosened around his neck.  His eyes looked tired.
    “Maybe I would worry less if you told me more.”
    “Fine,” Dad said. “What do you want to know?”
    “Why can’t Sara get a work permit?”
    “It’s complicated.”
    “I’ve got a lot of spaghetti to eat.”
    Dad sighed. “During the Cold War, it was very hard for Soviet citizens to immigrate to the West. Vienna is actually further east than Prague, and so it was the closest Western city to a number of former Soviet-bloc countries. Austria could afford to be generous about granting asylum to refugees who did manage to get through, because there were very few of them. 
    “But after the Berlin Wall came down in 1989, things started to change, and with the end of the Soviet Union in 1991, large numbers of Eastern Europeans began to move west, looking for more political freedom and more economic opportunities. Wait, I need to back up. Do you know what asylum is?”
    “An old-fashioned word for a mental hospital?”
    “Yeah, but not in this context. Asylum is an official legal status granted to someone who has left their country due to persecution. It gives the seeker many benefits, including the right to work and settle in the new country permanently. That was fine when it was only a trickle of Soviet scientists or artists fleeing a repressive regime. But now that it’s become a flood of refugees escaping a war zone, some leaders here have started to worry about these new immigrants overwhelming their social services: unemployment, health care, schools, et cetera.
    “So in June of last year, a new immigration law went into effect. Now less than 10 percent of applicants in Austria are granted asylum, and instead, most receive TPS—temporary protected status.”
    “What’s that?” I asked.
    “It means they can stay in the country, but they are not allowed to work. They get a certain amount of money for food, shelter, and health care, but no work permit, because the goal is, once the fighting stops, for them to go back home.” Dad shook his head. “It’s a little confusing even to me. Apparently, there are different agencies in Austria for work and residence permits[JL252][KL253], and they have different quotas. All sorts of strange things can happen, like a foreigner having a work permit but not being officially allowed to live in Austria or vice versa.”
    “What do I have?” I asked.
    “You have a tourist visa. It’s good for three months.”
    “Do you have permission to live in Austria?” I asked.
    “Yes.”
    “Do you have a work permit?” I asked.
    “Of course!”
    “Why did they give you one and not Sara?”
    “Because I’m an American and they know I have enough money to support myself and . . .”
    “If Sara could get a job, she could support herself too!”
    “True.” Dad sighed. “The pasta is getting cold. Let’s eat.”
    I twirled a bunch of spaghetti around my fork, but I wasn’t very hungry anymore.
    “I wish Sara hadn’t taken you to the police station,” Dad said crossly. “I just want you to have a fun time in Austria this summer. I don’t want you to worry.”
    I wanted to tell Dad about my list, about how Sara was going to help me face my fears. But I was afraid he wouldn’t understand.
***
The next morning, after my dad left for work, Felix and Sara came over. I watched Sara as she took three eggs from the carton on the counter and placed them in a pot, then added just enough water to cover them. My stomach started to hurt. “We eat egg with you,” she said. As soon as the water began to boil, she set the timer.
    I began to shiver as the clock counted down. I set the table, putting out tiny spoons, little eggcups, and a knife to cut the shells off the top.
    My head was throbbing. I felt like I was going to throw up. The oatmeal I’d eaten for breakfast sat like a lump in my stomach. I had no room for an egg. Even though I’d eaten half my normal serving.
    Felix set the eggs down on the table. Sara cut off the tops. The yellow yolk oozed down the side of the shell. Felix added salt and pepper to his egg and dug in. “Yum.”
    “Becca?” Sara asked. “Tastes best warm.”
    I picked up my spoon, feeling like a prisoner being told to walk the plank in shark-infested waters. Except I had asked to be there. What’s wrong with me? Why did I ever think I could do this? They’re crazy. Raw eggs can kill you!
    “It is cooked,” Sara said. “Not like you used to. But cooked. Try.”
    I stuck the spoon into the egg, and the yolk coated the metal spoon yellow. It dripped like pus.
    “I’m sorry,” I said, standing up and pushing in my chair. “I just can’t!”
    “Is safe egg,” Sara coaxed. “From nice chicken.”
    “I don’t know that!” I yelled, in a panic now.
    I ran to my room and slammed the door, throwing myself on the bed. This was so embarrassing. I was so disappointed. I really wanted to try it. But, but, but . . . I started to cry.
***
Twenty minutes later I heard a knock on my door. “Becca,” Felix called out.
    “What do you want?”
    “Sara has an idea.”
    “I’m not eating an egg!”
    “She doesn’t want you to eat anything,” he said. “She wants you to meet a chicken.”
    That was the stupidest thing I’d ever heard. I jumped up and opened the door. “Meet a chicken? That’s the best you could come up with?”
    “I’m not joking,” he said.
    “No joke,” Sara called from downstairs. “Grab bus pass.”
    “Come on,” Felix said. “We might as well go. I’m gonna bring a book.”
    I had asked Sara to help me with my list. And I didn’t really want to spend the day crying in my room. “Fine,” I snapped. “Guess we’re going to meet a chicken.”

