 20
The Present
Ms. Madden still had her gold hoop earrings[JL278][KL279], but she looked more casual this time, in jeans, a pea-green shirt, and a leather jacket. “I thought it was you!” she exclaimed.
    “Do you two know each other?” Katarina asked.
    “Yes.” Ms. Madden said. “We met on the plane. Wait, you said you were going to visit your father. Is he that nice American man Katarina has been dating?” She pointed to my father.
    “Yeah, that’s him.”
    “Ha!” She laughed. “As I say, Vienna is really just a big small town.”
    “How do you two know each other?” I asked.
    Katarina linked her arm with Ms. Madden’s. “We were roommates in journalism school.”
    Dad walked over then. “Your daughter has quite the sense of curiosity,” Ms. Madden said to my father. “She made me give her a lecture on the geography of Yugoslavia in the middle of the night on an airplane!”
    Everyone laughed.
    “I didn’t make you,” I protested. “All I did was ask a couple of questions.”
    “Spoken like a true journalist!” said Katarina approvingly.
    “I did save the map you drew me,” I admitted. I’d taped it into my Doomsday Journal.
    “That settles it. Mr. Greenberg, you must bring your amazing daughter to the candlelight vigil Katarina’s friends are organizing next month.”[SB281][KL282]
    “What’s that?” I asked.
    “We’re protesting Haider’s Österreich Zuerst petition,” Katarina explained. “Literally, it means Austria First. Jörg Haider is a former governor of Kärnten.”
    “That’s one of Austria’s states,” Ms. Madden added.
    “Haider and his party are hoping to get more-restrictive immigration policies in place,” Katarina went on, “to prevent more refugees from coming. He’s trying to get one million people to sign his petition outlining his twelve-step plan to keep Austria ‘pure.’”
    Ms. Madden rolled her eyes. “Some people forget that the Austrian Empire included many different peoples: Germans, Hungarians, Czechs, Slovaks, Poles, Slovenes, Croatians, Serbians, Romanians, Italians, Ukrainians. Austria has always been a multicultural society. What is this idea of a pure Austrian?! It doesn’t exist.”
    “We want to make sure the petition fails,” Katarina said. “So some friends of mine are organizing a protest in support of foreigners and refugees. Hester’s agreed to cover it. And I was actually just talking to Rasheed’s mother about it. She’s an immigration lawyer. We should all go together!”
    “What do you say, Becca?” Ms. Madden asked.
    “I’d love to come.” I remembered all the people I’d seen waiting at the police station.
    “Becca,” Dad said gently. “There are going to be lots of people there. I know you don’t like—"
    “I want to go,” I insisted. I had to go. It was on my list.
    “Fine,” Dad said. “We can talk about it later.”
    Our exchange hung awkwardly in the air like a bad smell. Sara and the accordion player launched into another song.
    “Who is this fabulous violin player?” Ms. Madden asked.
    I was grateful to her for changing the subject. “It’s Sara, our au pair.”
    “Ah, the famous au pair.” Ms. Madden said. “Well, she is very good.”
    Dad and Katarina excused themselves to go mingle with the other guests, but Ms. Madden and I sat and listened. “Did you make it to Sarajevo?” I asked.
    “Yes, I just returned. I’ll go back in a day or two, but I’ll return to Vienna in time for the protest.”
    “How are things there?”
    “Bad. The Serbs’ policy of ‘ethnic cleansing’ involves shelling towns until most of the population flees. Then they send in small squads to clear out whoever[JL284][KL285] remains.”
    “Sara’s mom and brother are missing,” I confessed. “They had to stay behind when she left. Do you think you could find them?”
    “Becca,” Ms. Madden said kindly. “Sarajevo is a city of half a million people. I have a TV camera, not a magic wand.”
    “Can I give you their names? You could keep an eye out. Just in case.”
    “Sure,” she said. She passed me a paper coaster with the Heuriger’s name on it and handed me a pen. I still had Sara’s flyer in my Doomsday Journal, so I remembered how to spell their names. I carefully printed Petra Tahirović, age 44 and Eldin Tahirović, age 6 [SB286][KL287]and handed the coaster back to her.
    Ms. Madden stuck it in the pocket of her blazer. “I’ll see what I can do.” She glanced at her watch. “I’m afraid I have to go. But it was lovely to see you again.”
    Felix was in the middle of opening presents when I rejoined the [SB288]other kids.
    Frau Gamperl gave Felix a tomato plant (“Never too early to start gardening!”), Dad and I gave Felix a book of Lincoln’s speeches, Katarina got him a bunch of sweaters, and one of the boys gave him a board game. He got a card with money from his father, a couple of more books, and then Mai handed him another card. 
“Happy birthday, Felix,” she said. “You mentioned once in history class that you liked old movies, so…”    
    Felix ripped the card open. “Frau Kovács Tanzschule?” He sounded uncertain. “You gave me dance lessons?”
    “No!” Mai gasped. “Mom, I told you to get him a gift certificate to the English-language movie theater. Not a dance class!”
    	Her mom looked confused. “But…but… you and Daisy signed up for the teen ballroom dancing class. I thought it would be fun.”
    “Why didn’t you tell me?” Mai wailed.
    “I did! In the car. You were listening to your Walkman.”
    Mai burst into tears and ran out of the room.
    An awkward silence fell over the table. “I’m so sorry,” Mai’s mother said. “I guess we got our wires crossed.”
    “It was a lovely idea,” Katarina agreed. 
“Wait,” I said. “Frau Kovács — is that a Hungarian name?”		    
    “Yeah,” Daisy said. “The dance studio is right next to this café that serves the best gelato.”[SB291][KL292]
    “Hey!” Sara said. “That’s where my friend works. I’m the teaching assistant for that class[JL293][KL294].”
    “Oh, yeah!” Felix remembered. “The guy from McDonald’s.”
    “You went to McDonald’s?” Katarina scolded. “Felix, they do not use happy eggs.”
    “Can I sign up?” I asked. I liked classes. I was good at classes. There were rules and instructions to follow. Policies to keep everyone safe. And the chicken dance had been pretty fun.
    Rasheed’s mother jumped in next. “I’ve been trying to get Rasheed to take a dance class for years. This would be the perfect opportunity.”
    Rasheed sighed. “I’ll do it if Peter signs up too.”
    “I’ll do it if Felix does it.”
    Everyone turned to look at the birthday boy. Felix’s face took on a greenish hue. “Okay, I guess.”
    “Wonderful!” Katarina looked delighted.
    I grabbed Felix’s arm.  “Let’s go find Mai.”
    “How could you let this happen?!” Felix snapped at me, as we searched through the rooms of the Heuriger. 
 “Mai was so embarrassed. We had to do something!”    
    “My father is the one who likes to dance, not me!”
    “Maybe you will like it. And you can add it to your list.”
    Felix glared.
    We found Mai sitting on a bench in front of the Heuriger. “I’m so sorry!” she cried when she saw Felix. “I wanted to give you something…different. I thought maybe we could go to the movies together and…this is so embarrassing!”
    “Aww, it’s not that bad,” I said, sitting down next to her. Felix hovered nearby. “We actually all decided to sign up.”
    “What?” Mai wiped her eyes with a napkin.
    “Tell her, Felix.”
    He swallowed hard. “Yeah. Peter and Rasheed and Becca and I are gonna sign up too. Might be fun?”
    “Felix,” she said with a little smile. “You’re even nicer than I thought.”
    We went back to the others, but it was time to go. 
    “Great party!” Daisy said as her family was leaving.
    “Thanks for the invite,” said Rasheed.
    Peter clapped Felix on the back and cried, “I’ll see you in dance class!”
Mai just waved and blushed.    
    Katarina fluttered around, packing up all the gifts. “Mai’s mother gave me all the details. The class meets Fridays at two p.m. We’ll sign you both [JL297][KL298]up. I’m so proud of you, Felix! And you can ride your bikes there.”
    Wait. What[SB299][KL300]?
    “Bikes?” I asked.
    “It’s a short ride,” said Katarina. “Lovely. Through the park, with only a short section on the street. And no worries, Becca. We have an extra bike for you.”
    “I’d rather take the bus,” I said.
    “Oh, no, no, no,” said Katarina. “There’s no direct route. You’d have to change three times. It would take forever. Bikes are the way to go.”
    “Oh dear,” Dad said sadly. “Becca can’t ride a bike.”
    I glanced over at Felix. He was trying so hard not to laugh. On your list[JL301][KL302], he mouthed at me. 
    “Actually, Dad,” I sighed. “Maybe it’s time to give bike riding another try.”
    “The class starts Friday,” Dad pointed out. “That doesn’t give you much time.”
    “Oh, Schatzi,” Katarina said to Dad. “Sometimes you worry too much. She’ll learn!”
    “I don’t want to pay for the class and have her not be able to go,” Dad said.
    “I teach her,” Sara said. “My little brother learned, and he only six.”
    Finally, Dad nodded. “Okay. We’ll sign you both up [JL305][KL306]for the class.”
    “Great!” I said[JL307][KL308], but all I could think was Now I have five days to learn to ride a bike.

