 28
Climb Every Mountain
Felix and I met up in front of the bike-storage room about an hour later. “Okay,” he said with a grimace. “Maybe it helped a little.”
    “You wouldn’t be talking about my completely silly diary idea, would you?”
    “Come on, bike rider.” He smiled. “Let’s go.”
    The first part of the journey was pretty easy. I wobbled a bit as I got on the bike, but quickly found my balance. The path through the park wasn’t crowded, and the wind felt nice, cooling my ears under my helmet. The trees grew together over the path, creating patterns of light and shadow on the pavement. Before I knew it, we had reached the section of the trail that went along the street. Felix turned the corner. I took a deep breath and followed him.
    There was a marked bike lane, but the road was busier than I’d expected. Cars whizzed by. The traffic didn’t seem to bother Felix. Does that mean it’s safe? Or is he just reckless? My heart started to beat faster. It was only a few more blocks. I could do this. Right? Right?!
    A Straßenbahn turned onto the street then, ringing its bell, ordering the cars out of its way. I tensed up. My elbows and knees no longer felt like joints. I was the Tin Man from The Wizard of Oz. Seriously, it’s hard to ride a bike without joints. I began to wobble, almost running into a parked delivery van, but I recovered my balance. One more block.
    A car horn sounded, loud and sharp. I squeezed on the brakes. Too late, I remembered that was exactly what Sara had told me not to do. It was too hard and too fast. I swerved wildly, hoping that would somehow keep me from pitching over the handlebars.
    It didn’t. I ended up on the curb, tangled in my bike.
    Another car whizzed by, so close I could feel the wind.
    There was blood on my knee. A lot of blood. This was my worst nightmare. I’d fallen off my bike in the street. Maybe I hit my head too. I felt my helmet. It didn’t seem damaged. But maybe I’m disoriented.
    I could feel the tears welling up, the panic rising in me, like the crowd at the opera, leaping to their feet to applaud. Good job, Becca! my brain was yelling at me. You’ve gone and gotten yourself hurt!
    “Hey.” Felix had noticed I wasn’t following him, and had doubled back. “You all right?”
    No! I wanted to scream. I’m not. I knew this would happen. I never should have tried. I never should have left home.
    “Oh, gosh, you’re bleeding,” Felix said. But the thing was, his tone was conversational. As if he were talking about the weather. He didn’t really sound that upset.
    Panic! My brain instructed. You got hurt! And yet there was Felix, acting like this wasn’t a big deal. And that was when I had an amazing thought. Really unique, at least for me.
    Maybe it wasn’t[JL388][KL389] a big deal.
    I mean, sure, I had gotten hurt. But I was pretty certain nothing was broken. And my helmet didn’t have a scratch on it, so I hadn’t hit my head. I had fallen between two parked cars, so I was safe from oncoming traffic. Sure, this wasn’t great—I’d end up at dance class with a scraped and bloody knee. But maybe this was like when I’d freaked out in the line at the opera. Maybe I could handle it.
    “Yeah,” I said, reminding myself not to look at the blood running down my leg. “I, um . . .” I swallowed hard. “I have a first aid kit in my backpack.”
    Felix jumped into action, zipping open my bag and pulling it out. “Got it.” He rummaged around until he found a roll of gauze. “Come sit on the curb,” he said, “and I’ll clean you up.”
    I untangled myself from the bike and crawled over to the curb. Felix knelt down next to me. Every time I caught a glimpse of the blood, I felt woozy. You have a concussion! my brain screamed at me.
    Probably not! I yelled back. Since I didn’t hit my head.
    Felix cleaned my leg, using a piece of gauze to wipe up all the blood. He used an antiseptic wipe to apply pressure to the wound; it felt cold on my skin. When he was done, I forced myself to look down.
    The cut was much smaller than I excepted, only about an inch long, just under my kneecap. There was a long scrape on my calf too. But that was it. No broken bone poking out of the skin. No huge gash exposing tendons and muscles.
    You’re going to get an infection!
    Shut up, brain, I said to myself. And then to Felix, “I think there’s some antibiotic ointment in there too.”
    He dug around in the kit, found the tube, squeezed some out onto a clean piece of gauze, and spread it gently onto the cut and the scrape. A drop of blood oozed out and then stopped.
    “Plaster?” he asked.[SB390]
    “I don’t think it’s broken . . . Oh.” He was holding up a Band-Aid. “Yes, please.”
    He pasted it on, as gentle as my mom. “There!” he said when he was done. He picked up the bloody gauze and threw it in a nearby trash can[JL391][KL392]. I sat numbly on the curb. So I hadn’t died. “I don’t think I can get back on the bike,” I said.
    Felix sighed and sat down next to me. “Did I ever tell you why I don’t like to dance?”
    I shook my head. I was happy to listen to any story if it meant I didn’t have to get back on the bike.
    “When I was really little, maybe four or five, my father took me to a dance class he was teaching. I had these tiny little tap shoes, and I remember being so excited. But when the class started, it was a disaster. The students were nine or ten, and they looked giant to me. I stood in the back row with no idea what to do. Halfway through the class I started to cry. My father had to stop instruction and get me a drink of water. I felt so awful. I had let him down! My parents split up about a month after that class. And for years I sort of thought he left because he was embarrassed to have a son like me.”
    I opened my mouth to say [SB394][KL395]that wasn’t true. But hadn’t I worried about the same thing with my father?
    “I know that doesn’t make sense,” Felix went on. “Those kids were twice my age. My parents were already having problems—he probably took me that evening because Mama was meeting with her lawyer or something. And yet I couldn’t shake the feeling that the night of the failed dance class was when everything started to go wrong.”
    “I’ve felt that way too,” I admitted.
    “I want to go to the dance class,” Felix continued. “I don’t want to disappoint Mai. But it’s more than that. I want to tell my dad that I tried again. But I don’t think I can do it if you’re not there to help me. So please, Becca, get back on the bike.”
    I did.
    Of course I did.
    And I followed him into the traffic. Even though I was terrified. It’s a lot easier to be brave when you’re helping out a friend.
***
The dance studio was located in a big old building with a central courtyard. We left our bikes there and followed the signs up a rickety set of stairs to the studio. In the first room, there were little benches with cubbies underneath for your belongings.
    Sara walked over to me as I was storing my backpack. “What happened to your knee?”
    “Oh,” I said. “I had a little . . . mishap on the bike.”
    “Mishap?” Sara asked.
    “I fell off,” I admitted.
    I waited for her to worry. To say, Are you hurt? Did you clean the cut? Like my parents would have done. But instead she said, “You okay.”
    It was a statement, not a question, and somehow, that made me feel better.
    “Yeah,” I agreed. “I am.”
    The [JL397][KL398]instructor, a tall, impossibly thin woman with a dance skirt and a bun, came out and clapped her hands. She said something in German I didn’t understand, then repeated herself in English. “The teen dance class is beginning shortly. Please come into the studio.”
    We followed her into a large, open room with polished wooden floors. The walls were lined with mirrors. A barre for ballet had been shoved to the back of the room.
    “Felix! Becca!”
    We turned around to see Daisy and Mai.[JL399][KL400]
    “I’m so glad you came,” Mai said to Felix.
    Felix nodded. He looked a little green.
    Rasheed and Peter waved to us from across the room. I waved back, and then the teacher clapped her hands again. “Gather around, please. Girls facing clockwise, boys facing counterclockwise.”
    Felix grabbed my arm. “Be my partner,” he said desperately.
    “Sure,” I said. Daisy and Rasheed squeezed into the circle next to us. Mai and Peter were on the other side.
    “Willkommen[JL401][KL402]!” The teacher cleared her throat. “I am Frau Kovács. These are my assistants, Sara and Marco.” Marco gave a little bow, and Sara curtsied. “They will be demonstrating the steps. This is a five-week class on ballroom basics. Everyone who completes the class will get an invitation to the University Ball on August 28.”
    “A ball?” squealed Daisy[JL403][KL404].
    August 28 was a few days before I was going back home. A ball sounded like a pretty cool way to wrap up my visit.
    “We start with a waltz,” the teacher continued. “There are three counts. Count with me. Eins, zwei, drei. Eins, zwei, drei.”
    We ran through a few basic steps. Sara and Marco demonstrated and walked around the circle to help anyone who was having trouble. I listened as intently as if we were learning the safety procedures for skydiving. It turned out I was actually a pretty good dancer. “Just like following a recipe,” I told Felix.
    “Wunderbar!” said Frau Kovács. “Now we change partners.”
    “You can do it!” I whispered as Felix moved around the circle to the next girl. It was Mai. She was smiling. Felix was as pale as the powdered sugar on an Apfelstrudel.
    My new partner was Peter; he was a decent dancer. Rasheed was awful but so cheerful about his mistakes, he was fun to dance with. Then there were a couple of guys I didn’t know, and the next time the teacher called “Partner wechseln!” Felix was standing before me again.
    “I did it!” he exclaimed as we practiced the steps. “And I only stepped on her foot once! I apologized, of course, but then she said Peter had stepped on her foot three times, and Rasheed had stepped on her five times, so I was actually doing the best of all!”
    The class went faster than I’d expected. “Hmm,” Frau Kovács said when we were done. “You are not terrible. See you next week!”
***
    After class, Marco led our little group to his father’s ice cream shop. Giovanni’s Gelato was just around the corner, in an old building with marble floors and carved ceilings. The molding on the walls was old, but the furnishings were modern, with glass tabletops made from bits of melted glass and sleek metal chairs. Colorful [JL405][KL406]masks and robes covered the walls, all feathers and flowers and beads, as if a masquerade party had hung up their costumes.
    A man who had a mop of thick gray hair and was wearing an apron greeted us when we came in. “Buongiorno!” he said. “Willkommen bei Giovanni! Das beste Eis im . . .” He groaned when he saw Marco. “Mein Sohn bringt die ganze Klasse.” Everyone laughed.
    “What’d he say?” I asked.
    “He complained about his son bringing the entire class,” Felix whispered.
    Marco chattered with his father in Italian for a moment. His father looked at us again, with more interest this time, then he grinned and said something in Italian.
    “My father welcomes you to our shop,” Marco translated. “He says, ‘Friends of my son are friends of mine.’”
    Marco showed us to a big booth in the corner, surrounded by windows and padded with little blue velvet pillows. He handed each of us a menu. Instead of words, this menu had color photos of the most amazing ice cream sundaes I’d ever seen.
    Felix and Peter got the Schoko-Lovers sundae; Daisy ordered the Hawaiian—pineapple gelato, vanilla sauce, and pistachios.[JL407][KL408] Sara got the Klimt (apparently a famous Austrian painter who liked gold leaf), and everything was golden on her sundae—butter-pecan gelato, butterscotch, and toasted almonds. Mai ordered a Berry Bonanza, which had so much fruit, I wasn’t sure it counted as a treat after all. Marco and Rasheed each got an iced coffee with vanilla ice cream, and I got the Mozart, the house specialty, which had a little bit of everything.
    “Oh my gosh!” Daisy exclaimed when Marco placed the sundae down in front of me. “It’s huge!”
    We dug in. “You’re so lucky your parents let you bike here by yourselves,” Rasheed said between bites. “My mom made me carpool with Daisy.”
    She shoved him playfully.
His comment made me remember his mom was a lawyer. I glanced over at Sara. She and Marco and his dad were chatting in the corner of the store, out of earshot.     “Rasheed, can I ask you for some advice?”
    “Sure,” Rasheed said. “Chess or Legos? Those are my two areas of expertise.”
    I laughed. “Legal advice.”
    “I don’t know anything about the law,” Rasheed said. [SB410][KL411]“If you want to know about that, ask my mom.”
    “Yeah,” I said. “That’s the idea. At Felix’s party, Katarina said your mom specializes in—"
    “Immigration law.” He sighed. “It’s all she ever talks about now. She used to work for a big corporate firm, but then she quit her old job and started her own practice.”
    “Why do you care about immigration law?” Peter asked.
    “It’s not advice for me,” I admitted. “It’s about Sara.”
    “She is such a good dancer,” Mai sighed. “I heard the teacher ask her and Marco to help open the ball.”
    “Open the ball?” I asked. “What does that mean? They stand at the door and hand out programs?”
    Daisy laughed. “No, at the beginning of every ball they ask a bunch of young couples to perform the first dance.”
    “It’s a great honor,” added Mai. “And they get to wear these beautiful white dresses.”
    Peter rolled his eyes. “Becca asked for legal advice, not fashion tips.”
    Rasheed leaned in close. “Is Sara here illegally?”
    “No. But she only has that temporary thing.”
    “TPS?” asked Rasheed.
    “Yeah,” I said. “So she can’t work.”
    “Oh,” said Peter. “I guess that’s why she told the Heuriger owner no.”
    “What?” Felix asked.
    “At your birthday party. She was so good on the violin. The owner offered her a job playing for him on weekends. She turned him down.”
    “We’re worried about her family,” I went on. “Her mom and brother sent her a letter saying they were coming to join her here, but . . . they never showed up.”
    “Do you think your mom could help find them?” Felix asked.
    Rasheed frowned. “I don’t know,” he admitted. “But I’ll ask her.”
    “Thanks,” I said.
***
On the way home, I could barely breathe as we wove through the traffic, but the scary part was over after about five minutes. The path through the park was easier. When we arrived at home, I took off my bike helmet and shook my sweaty hair free. And I felt, well . . . I felt like I had climbed a mountain.

