 29
In Prague
Things went pretty smoothly for a couple of weeks after that. We went sightseeing; we biked to dance class; we ate ice cream. Dad announced he was taking us on a quick trip to Prague during the second weekend in [KL415]August.
    “I wish we had more time,” Dad said. “But the plan is for us to leave on the train early Saturday morning. We’ll get to Prague in the late afternoon and have dinner. Then we’ll have all day Sunday to sightsee. Katarina and I have to work Monday, so we’re going to get up super early and take the four a.m. train. You and Felix and Sara can sleep in and come back with Sara around eleven a.m.”
    “Sounds good to me,” I said.
    We took a taxi to the same train station where we’d dropped off my mom. The train we boarded was made up of mini-rooms with six seats, three facing forward and three facing backward. Dad said you could slide the seats together to make a little bed on an overnight trip.
    Felix had a guidebook (of course). “In 1989,” he read, “Czechoslovakia overthrew its communist regime in a peaceful transition of power commonly referred to as the Velvet Revolution. On January 1, 1993, it split into two independent countries, the Czech Republic and Slovakia. Prague is the capital of the Czech Republic.”
    “How exciting,” said Katarina, “to visit a country that is only eight months old!”
    “Another communist country that dissolved into independent states?” I asked. “Is it safe?”
    “Yes, perfectly safe,” Dad said. “This split was completely peaceful.”
    “Then why is the situation in Yugoslavia so different?” I asked.
    The question hung uncomfortably in the air for a moment, until the door to our compartment slid open and the conductor arrived to check our tickets. Once he was gone, Sara pulled out a package of Leibniz biscuits—these were flat shortbread-like cookies. She’d gotten the ones that were dipped in chocolate on one side.
    We all munched happily for a while, looking out the window at the scenery. After about two hours, the train stopped. “Are we there already?” I asked.
    “No,” said Katarina, “we’re at the Czech border. It’s just passport control.”
    Another conductor, this time wearing a Czech uniform, came into our compartment. “Pässe bitte. Passports, please,” he called out.
    Dad gave him ours. Katarina handed over [JL416][KL417]hers and Felix’s. Sara adjusted her purse strap and pulled her passport out of her little green bag.
    The man didn’t even open mine and Dad’s, just nodded when he saw the little blue books with United States of America and the eagle on the cover. He opened Katarina’s and Felix’s, glanced at the pictures, then promptly closed them again.
    Sara’s passport was a dark maroon. There were multiple folded papers inside. “Guten Tag,” Sara said pleasantly.
    The man frowned at her. He examined the papers in great detail, looking over every single page. He stuck his head into the hallway and called another, older man in uniform over to ask him a question.
    “It’s just a weekend trip,” Dad explained. “Then she’ll be returning with us to Austria.”
    Finally, the older man said, “Alles in Ordnung.”
    The younger man sighed, frowned again, and reluctantly stamped her passport.
    “Danke,” said Sara. “Schönen Tag.”
    The man didn’t answer, just handed her passport back. He closed the compartment door just a little too hard on his way out.
    I ate another chocolate biscuit, but it didn’t taste as good this time. It seemed like the Czech Republic was worried about Bosnian refugees too.
    When we arrived in Prague, we took another taxi from the train station to the apartment my father had rented. There was a living room and a full kitchen with a table big enough for six. It also had three bedrooms: one with a king bed, one with a double, and the other with two twins.
    “This place must have been expensive,” I said.
    Dad shook his head. “Twenty dollars a night. I paid in dollars.”
    “Why is it so cheap?” I asked.
    Dad shrugged. “People want hard currency.”
    “Hard currency?” I asked.
    “It means money from a country that’s politically stable, so the currency is unlikely to fluctuate [KL419]in value,” Katarina explained. “Like American dollars or German marks or British pounds. Remember the Czech koruna was only invented in January.”
    “In fact”—Dad took out his wallet and pulled out some bills[JL420][SB421][KL422]—“the currency still says Czechoslovakia. They just put a stamp on the larger denominations.”
    “That’s so cool!” said Felix. “I want to save one. Part of history!”
    I remembered Sara’s dream and how her mother had used German marks to go shopping. I glanced over at her now, but she was busy unpacking her backpack.
    Once we were settled in, we went on a walk. Prague reminded me a lot of Vienna, with the same style of grand buildings, the same cobblestone streets, even the same distinctive yellow paint from Schönbrunn. “It looks a lot like Austria,” I said.
    “That’s because it was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire,” Felix said. “The Hapsburgs ruled over Prague as well.”
    We went to a nearby restaurant for dinner. I thought it was going to be super expensive—it had white tablecloths and waiters in tuxedos—but it came to only about ten dollars a person. Hard currency sure bought a lot.
    “Tomorrow,” Felix said as we walked back to our apartment, “I want to see the astronomical clock and Kafka’s house and the castle.”
    “I want to see the Jewish cemetery,” said Katarina.
    Dad turned to Sara and me. “Ladies, any requests?”
    Sara shook her head.
    I said, “I want to get some ice cream.”
    Dad laughed.
***
Early the next morning, I was enjoying a leisurely breakfast of yogurt and muesli (which was like granola) [JL423][KL424]when Felix realized the apartment clock was slow and we only had ten minutes to make it to Old Town Square to see the Prague Astronomical Clock. “Every hour on the hour, there’s a little show,[JL425][KL426]” Felix explained as he hurried us out the door. “I don’t want to miss it!”
    We made it to the square with about twenty seconds to spare. Built in 1410, the clock had two big faces—one dial representing the sun’s and moon’s positions and another one showing the months of the year. Above the sun/moon face were two small windows. As the clock chimed nine, the windows opened and a bunch of apostle figurines paraded by.[JL427][KL428] A grinning skeleton rang a bell, and Felix took about a bazillion pictures.
    After the clock, we went to Kafka’s house. Apparently, Kafka was the guy who wrote the book about a man who gets turned into a cockroach. His house was located on the grounds of Prague Castle, on a tiny street called the Golden Lane. The house itself was blue, with “No 22” written over the doorway. Felix posed proudly with a copy of The Metamorphosis, which he’d brought along from home.
    The buildings that made up Prague Castle looked a bit like Schönbrunn, though in Prague they were arranged [JL429][KL430]in a giant square with a cathedral in the central courtyard. We went on the one-hour English-language tour. We had lunch, and then Katarina’s Jewish cemetery was next. Felix read from his guidebook as we walked.
    “The Jewish community in Prague wasn’t allowed to purchase land for a new cemetery, so they put soil on top of the old graves and reused the same piece of land. In some parts of the cemetery, there are as many as twelve layers of bodies. So much dirt was added, walls had to be built to hold the graves and the soil in place. Some of the headstones you can see today are for bodies many layers down.”
    The cemetery was way more interesting than I’d expected. For one thing, Felix was right. The ground was raised several feet higher than the rest of the street. The tombstones were crowded extremely close together, leaning at odd angles, as if a child had stuck stones into the ground at random. Some of the grave markers were covered in Hebrew; others had names that were so worn with weather and time, you could barely read them at all. Dad and Felix and Sara went off to try to decipher more tombstones, but my feet were tired, so I sat down on a bench next to Katarina.
    “I’m glad we came,” she said, fanning herself with Felix’s guidebook. She wore a light silk blouse that looked like an impressionist painting, but it was hot. “I’ve always wanted to see the Old Jewish Cemetery[JL432][KL433].”
    “Why?” I asked.
    Katarina shrugged. “I think it’s important to visit Jewish historical monuments. I’ve been to the Anne Frank house in Amsterdam. I’ve even been to the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem.”
    “Are you Jewish?” I asked.
    “No.” She was quiet for a long moment.
    “Dad’s parents were,” I told her, “but they never went to synagogue. My mother was raised Methodist. We always just celebrated a little bit of everything.”
    Katarina was silent for a long moment, then added in almost a whisper, “I think my parents were members of the Nazi Party.”
    “What?”
    “We never talked about it,” she went on. “And they weren’t concentration camp guards or anything like that. But they were party members. When I was a child, I found the papers in the attic, on a rainy day when my brother and I were playing hide-and-seek. I tried to ask my mother about it last year, before she died. She waved a hand in the air and said, ‘It was just a piece of paper. It didn’t mean anything. It was what everyone did. We had to join.’
    “But it was wrong. My parents knew the Nazis were persecuting Jews and Romani [JL435]and homosexuals. And they didn’t do anything.” She paused. “Do you know the word Vergangenheitsbewältigung?”
    “That’s one word?” I asked.
    “Yes, and it means coming to terms with the past. Learning what it meant and how to live with it. For me, it means . . . I can’t pretend I don’t hear the reports about the ethnic cleansing going on in Bosnia now.”
    “Do you think Sara’s family is okay?”
    “I don’t know,” Katarina said quietly. “I hope so, but . . . what I do know is that I believe it’s wrong to pass laws that make it nearly impossible to get asylum. You know, in Nazi Germany they passed laws so that it was ‘legal’ to require Jewish citizens to register, ‘legal’ to make them live in certain parts of the country. It was legal, but it was still wrong.”
    I thought about that as I looked around the graveyard. In the olden days, sure, sometimes laws were wrong. I mean, slavery used to be legal, and that was clearly wrong! But I’d never thought about it today. Modern societies had gotten rid of the bad laws. Hadn’t they? I mean, was it possible that things we thought were perfectly okay and legal now would be considered illegal, even immoral in the future?
    My thoughts swirled together like the yellows, blues, and greens in Katarina’s blouse. “I really want to go to your candlelight vigil,” I said. “The one in support of refugees. But I’m not sure Dad will let me go.”
    Katarina smiled and squeezed my hand. “I’ll speak to your father.”

