 30
The Bridge, Part 2
The last place we visited was the Charles Bridge. Felix read more facts as we walked. “The Charles Bridge crosses the Vltava River, connecting Prague Castle and the Old Town. Construction began in 1357. Legend has it that King Charles IV himself lay the first stone at exactly 5:31 a.m. on the ninth of July. King Charles was a believer in numerology and thought [JL437][KL438]this would be an auspicious day and time, as it formed a palindrome: 1 3 5 7 9 7 5 3 1—year, day, month, and time.”
    “That’s cool,” I said.
    “Over fifteen hundred feet long and over thirty feet wide, the bridge is decorated by thirty statues placed at intervals along its span.”
    I stopped listening once we arrived at the foot of the bridge. It was late afternoon, and the sunlight was golden, giving all the stone a shimmery glow. The bridge was made up of sixteen stone arches, stretching gracefully across the river.
    “Oh, it’s a pedestrian bridge,” I exclaimed. “Like Kärntner Straße.” Along the edges of the bridge, I could see artists painting views of the river, vendors selling snacks, and people hawking souvenirs.
    Felix, Katarina, and Dad rushed ahead, eager to see the view from the middle of the bridge. I was about to join them when I glanced back at Sara.
    She stood frozen on the edge of the riverbank. “Come on,” I said. “I bet Dad will buy us ice cream.”
    “I tired,” Sara said. “I wait here.” She pointed to a bench.
    “We can sit on the bridge,” I insisted. “Come enjoy the view.”
    Sara shook her head.
    I didn’t know what was going on with her. I was about to go join my father when a little white dog ran onto the bridge. It barked once, twice, and then began to whine in fear.
    And I remembered.
    In Sarajevo, there was a bridge outside of Sara’s apartment. The bridge where she’d seen a dog get shot. The bridge where her mother had died in her dream[JL439][KL440].
    I went and sat down with Sara on the bench.
    “You not have to stay.”
    “I know,” I said. “But I want to.”
    I couldn’t find any more words, so we just sat and watched people stroll on and off the bridge. Dad looked back at us, but I waved and he didn’t come over to investigate.
    The little dog sat down in the shade of one of the statues. A moment later, an old woman rushed up to him, scolding loudly in Czech. The dog jumped up and licked her face.
    Sara was watching the dog too.
    “Do you want to try?” I asked.
    Sara nodded.
    I took her hand, and we stood up together. Slowly, step by step, we made our way to the edge of the bridge. Sara paused. There was a musician playing a violin, his case open before him. I threw in a couple of coins, and we took a few more steps.
    Felix glanced back at us then, and I guess he understood the look I gave him, because he ran back and took Sara’s other hand. “Sara,” he said, “there’s a man on the bridge selling surplus Soviet Army items. It’s so cool! You have to see it. He’s got these gigantic fur hats. And Mama said she’d buy me one!”
    We were on the bridge now. Sara was trembling, but she kept walking as Felix chattered on. I looked over at a woman painting. Her picture was beautiful—the bridge, the river, the red roofs of the houses, the green dome of the cathedral. Then I glanced up, and it was as if the drawing had suddenly sprung to life.
    The late-afternoon sun sparkled on the river. The cathedral spires reached into the sky, almost touching the wispy clouds. The statues of the saints stood protectively over us as we walked in and out of their shadows, approaching the center of the bridge.
    Dad and Katarina were waiting there, next to a man with a portable freezer. “Do you want some ice cream?” Dad asked.
    Of course we did. Sara let go of our hands to take her cone, getting ice cream on her nose with the very first lick. We all laughed, and as I handed her a napkin, Sara squeezed my hand and whispered, “Thank you.”
    And so the spell of the other phantom bridge was broken, and it was just a normal afternoon and we were just a normal family. Felix wore his new Siberian hat until sweat ran down his face. Katarina got into a long discussion with one of the artists and decided to purchase a painting. The man carefully removed the canvas from its frame, rolled it up, and placed it into a cardboard tube for Katarina to take home. Dad bought an old-fashioned pocket watch and kept popping it open to check the time. Sara and I watched the people stroll across the bridge; no one felt the need to run.
    We stayed on the bridge for a long, long time, until the sun started to go down. Felix, Sara, and Katarina were huddled over the guidebook, trying to decide where to go for dinner. Dad and I stood still by the edge, looking out over the water, a breeze cooling our faces. Maybe I was feeling good from helping Sara; in any case, I turned to my father and asked, “Dad, do you ever wish that I didn’t worry so much?”
    “What?” He turned to look at me, the setting sun making half his face glow, the other half in shadow.
    “I mean, I know you love me. And we had such a great time today! But sometimes, I feel like you wish that I . . . that I was a girl who didn’t need a Doomsday Journal.”
    “Rebecca, that’s not true,” he said gently.
    “I know,” I said, embarrassed, staring at the stones of the bridge. “It’s silly of me to—[JL441][KL442]”
    “It’s not silly of you either,” Dad[SB443] sighed and ran a hand through his hair. “I just thought I’d done a better job hiding my frustration. Becca, I was a lot like you as a kid. I worried about everything! And my parents were so impatient. I swore I’d never be like that. It’s hard to see you worry, to not know what to do or say to make it better. So you’re right—sometimes I am upset, but it’s never at you[JL444][KL445]. I’m only frustrated with myself.”
    “Oh.”
    Dad put his arm around me, and we looked up at the castle on the hill. It felt like we were in a fairy tale. “Becca,” Dad said. “You can worry as much as you want. You will always be my most special girl.”
    That night as I crawled into the twin bed across from Sara, the last thing I whispered to her was “This was a day full of pig.”

