 32
Polizei
I pushed the button, and the door between the cars whooshed open. The ground spun by beneath me, but I barely noticed this time. Sara will be waiting in the café car. She probably decided to buy us a chocolate bar or something, and the line was longer than she expected. I walked through the next car and pushed the button to open the final door. I took a deep breath, stepping into the café car.
    There was no one there.
    Well, that wasn’t quite true. The saleswoman behind the counter was still there. And the old woman who’d had the newspaper. A completely bald man with a briefcase sat in one corner. That was it.
    Where’s Sara?
    “Excuse me,” I said to the saleswoman. “Have you seen my au pair, Sara?”
    Oh, shoot! I wasn’t supposed to call her my au pair.
    But it didn’t matter, because the lady just shook her head and said, “Ich spreche kein Englisch.”
    “My friend Sara! We were just here. We spilled our drinks and—[JL451]”
    “Tut mir leid. Ich verstehe dich nicht.”
    The train went around a curve, and it felt like my world was suddenly completely off kilter. What was going on? I realized we’d been to so many touristy places, I’d begun to think everyone in Europe spoke English. But I was wrong. I was in a foreign country. Alone.
    “Sara!” I looked around the room. “Has anyone seen her?”
    The businessman ignored me, focusing on his papers.
    Is there another café car? Did I go the wrong way? Someone grabbed my elbow.
    It was the old woman. Her eyes were wide and worried. She began to speak in German, quick and fast.
    “I don’t understand,” I said.
    She kept talking, gesturing now. I knew she was trying to tell me something important, but I had no idea what. “I don’t speak German,” I moaned.
    “Polizei,” she said. “Polizei. Polizei.”
    Wait. I knew that word. “Police?”
    “Ja.”
    My skin broke out in goose bumps, as if I had walked into a freezer. I felt light-headed and clutched the table to stay upright. The police! Something happened to Sara.
    I needed Felix. “I’ll be right back,” I said to the woman. She nodded, but I wasn’t sure she understood me.
    As if in a dream, I walked through the two train cars, stopping in each bathroom, checking for Sara. In the last one before our compartment, I s[KL453]plashed some water on my face. I was reaching for a paper towel when I saw it.
    A bit of green strap peeking out of the trash bin.
    I grabbed the strap and pulled. Paper towels fell onto the floor to reveal Sara’s little green purse. The strap had been cut, as if with a sharp knife. The straps lay like limp pieces of spaghetti to either side of the small green pocket.
    I opened it quickly and looked inside.
    The money envelope from my father was gone. Sara’s passport was gone. It was completely empty, except for an old ponytail holder and a slip of paper. I pulled them both out.
    The notebook paper was folded and worn. It was Sara’s list!
    I clutched the list in one hand and the purse in the other and ran back to our compartment. “Felix,” I called out before I had the door fully open. “Something’s happened to Sara!”
    “What?” He was sitting extremely still, the book still unopened on his lap.
    “I found her purse in the bathroom. Someone cut the strap and took the money and her passport.”
    “Maybe . . . maybe it just broke and Sara threw it away.”
    I held up the piece of notebook paper. “Sara would never throw away her list.”
    Felix touched the paper carefully, as if it were gold leaf that might dissolve on his hands. “No,” he whispered. “She wouldn’t.”
    “And the old woman saw something,” I said.
    “Which old woman?” he asked.
    “In the café car. When the little boy ran into me, I spilled soda on this woman’s table.[JL454][KL455] We helped her wipe it up.”
    “Becca, what are you talking about?”
    “She tried to tell me, but I didn’t understand. She kept repeating, ‘Polizei, Polizei.’”
    Felix got even paler.
    “That means police, doesn’t it?” I asked.
    Felix nodded.
    “Come on. We have to talk to her.”
    We ran back to the café car, skipping over the gap between the doors like it was no more than a crack in the sidewalk. The man with the briefcase was gone, but the old woman was still there. She gestured to the empty seats, and we slid into the booth across from her.
    The woman started to speak quickly again, in German. Felix listened, interrupting her every now and then to ask a question.
    Time seemed to slow down as they talked. I felt so helpless and stupid. I started to notice random details: a patch of sticky soda on the table that we’d missed, an empty glass on a nearby table with a lipstick stain, a child’s greasy handprint on the window.
    Finally, the woman stopped talking. Felix’s face was gray.
    “What did she say?” I asked.
    “In a minute,” Felix said.
    The woman murmured one more thing.
    “Nein, nein,” said Felix. “Unsere Eltern sind hier. Danke nochmal.”
    He stood up. I followed his lead. “Danke,” I said too, even though I wasn’t sure what I was thanking her for.
    Felix practically ran back to our compartment. He was shaking.
    “What happened?” I demanded[JL456][KL457], slamming the compartment door.
    “The police took Sara!”
    “What? Took her where?”
    “Off the train. They arrested her!”
    “Arrested her? Why?!”
    “They said she didn’t have papers.”
    “But she did have papers! She had her passport. It was in her little green purse.”
    “She couldn’t find her purse,” Felix reminded me. “That’s why she went back to the café.”
    “But she had it when we paid for the drinks the first time!” I said.
    “They didn’t believe her. They saw her necklace and knew she was Muslim and figured she was a refugee trying to illegally enter the country by avoiding passport control, sneaking [JL458][KL459]from the bathroom to the café car and back again.”
    I looked at the little green purse on the seat. “But what happened to her passport?” I wondered. “It was in her purse. I saw it when she bought the sodas. And then the little boy ran into us and . . .”
    I had a horrible thought. Did that family rob Sara?
    “The woman said something about a little boy and a woman and a man,” Felix said.
    I described the scene to him quickly. “Do you think the woman told the little boy to run into her?”
    “Maybe. In the confusion, she or her husband could have quickly cut the strap on the purse. And grabbed it.”
    “And if anyone noticed, they could have just said they were trying to help.”
    “And maybe they knew where the border was, knew the train would stop soon, so they could jump off.”
    “And hopefully, she wouldn’t even discover the loss until they were gone.”
    “But why target Sara?” I asked. “Surely that businessman had more money.”
    “They must have heard you speaking English,” Felix said. “American passports are worth a lot on the black market. They must have figured Sara had your passport in her purse.” He shook his head.
    “And when they only found a Bosnian one, they took that and the money and dumped the purse in the trash.”
    “That’s what the old woman thought.”
    “Why didn’t she speak to the police?”
“She did,” Felix said. “But it all happened so fast. They wanted to get Sara off the train before it left the border.” He paused. “They thought Sara might be a little crazy. She was yelling something about hair as she left. ‘Green hair!’ [JL460][KL461]It didn’t make any sense.”     Felix started to shake. “What do we do, Becca? What do we do?”
    “Go talk to a conductor?”
    “What can he do? All he does is take the tickets!” Felix was panting now, his breaths short and shallow. “I feel sick,” he said. “I can’t breathe!”
    “You’re just panicking,” I said.
    I sat down next to him and passed him the bag the sandwiches had come in. Felix took it and retched into it. I patted his back.
    “Sorry,” he said when he was done.
    “Don’t be,” I said. “I’ve thrown up lots of times when I was stressed.”
    “Becca, what are we going to do?!” 
    Sara’s coffee was sitting on the ledge, untouched. I picked it up and took a sip. It was only lukewarm now, but the coffee was bitter and familiar. “I don’t think we can do anything,” I said. “I think we have to wait until we get back to Vienna.”
    “We can’t just wait!” Felix protested.
    “What are we going to do . . . jump off the train?”
    “I don’t know,” Felix wailed.[JL462][KL463]
    My mind was spinning. I didn’t have a page for this in my Doomsday Journal.
    “I feel dizzy,” Felix said.
    “You’re in shock,” I said automatically.
    Shock! I did have a page on shock. And I had my journal in my backpack. I stood on the seat and got it down. Quickly, I flipped through the pages.
    “What to do in case of shock,” I read. “Step one: Lay the person down and elevate their feet.”
    Felix and I looked at each other. Then he shrugged and sat down, putting his feet up on the seat across from him.
    “Step two,” I read. “Begin CPR (if necessary).”
    “Not necessary,” said Felix.
    “Step three,” I said. “Treat obvious injures.”
    Felix looked at his hands. “I have a paper cut.”
    I nodded, rummaged in my backpack again, and pulled out my first aid kit. I found the antibiotic ointment and a Band-Aid and put both on his finger.
    “Step four,” I read. “Keep person warm and comfortable.”
    “It is kind of cold in here,” Felix said.
    I unzipped his backpack and pulled out a sweatshirt. I handed it to him.
    He put it on.
    “Better?” I asked.
    “Yeah.”
    The strange thing was, I felt better too. Going through my list had given me something to do. Something I could do. I took another sip of Sara’s coffee[JL465][KL466]. “We’ll take the train back to Vienna,” I said. “Then get off with all our bags. Then call our parents.”
    “Okay,” said Felix.
    We sat in silence for a while after that.
    “Becca?”
    “Yeah?”
    “I lied,” Felix said. “I did like the opera.”
    “I know.”
    “If something like this had to happen . . . I’m glad I was with you.”
    “Yeah,” I said. “Me too.”
    I reached out and took his hand. It wasn’t romantic, ’cause Felix, ugh, he was sort of like my brother. It was more like, “let’s hold hands so we don’t feel so scared.” And maybe it worked, because we held hands like that all the way back to Vienna.

