 33
Words on a Page
It took two more hours, but at last the train pulled into the station. We gathered up our belongings and stumbled down the steps. Felix practically ran to a pay phone. He dialed and spoke in German a couple of times, with long pauses in between, before finally hanging up the phone. “Mama’s not there,” he told me. “She’s out doing an interview.”
    I tried my father then, at the work number he’d given me for emergencies. I’d never called it before. My fingers trembled as I dialed.[JL471][KL472]
    “He’s on his way back from his meeting,” his secretary told me. “They’re stuck in traffic somewhere. Would you like to leave a message?”
    “Tell him to call me at home,” I managed to blurt out. “It’s his daughter.”
    Felix and I looked at each other once I hung up. We hadn’t thought any further than this. “Do you have your Monatskarte?” he asked.
    “Yes.” My pass for August was safely tucked away in my backpack. We’d taken a taxi to the train station, but it wasn’t hard to study the posted map and find the correct streetcar to take us back to the bus. Sara’s backpack got heavier and heavier as we lugged it along, taking turns holding it on our laps.
    It took us almost an hour to make it back to the Julius Meinl grocery store on the corner by our bus stop. We were just passing the recycling bins when Frau Gamperl called out. “No one took out your trash last night,” she scolded. “Tell your father he needs to remember to . . .”
    We turned to look at her. Frau Gamperl caught a glimpse of our faces and stopped yelling. I imagined we looked pretty disheveled after being on the train for hours and trekking across town. She noticed the third backpack. “Where’s Sara?”
    “Gone,” Felix whispered.
    “Gone?” she asked, surprised.
    I shook my head, desperately trying not to cry.
    “Your parents?”
    “At work,” I said. “We can’t get in touch with them.”
    Frau Gamperl nodded as if she understood. “Come with me. We’ll talk at my place.”
    Of all the people I’d imagined helping us, Frau Gamperl was not one of them. As she led us up to her front door, I glanced at one of her little gnomes in the grass. It had green hair and was riding a bike. I started to cry, big silent tears running down my face. Felix was crying too—from relief at being home or fear or frustration, I wasn’t sure.
    Frau Gamperl opened the door and gestured for us to step inside. “Please take off your shoes.” The house was tidy[SB473][KL474], with simple wooden furniture that was old but in excellent shape.[JL475][KL476] There was a small round wooden sign that said “Willkommen” with little flowers painted around the edges and a cuckoo clock on one wall. “Sit down at the table,” she ordered. “I’ll make some tea.”
    The tea was good, black and strong, and she added milk and honey without asking. It was warm and sweet, and by the time we’d had a few sips, we’d managed to stop crying. Frau Gamperl put a few cookies with jam on a plate in the middle of the table. “Now,” she said. “Talk.”
    And we did. We told her about the train and Sara disappearing. Frau Gamperl was a good listener, nibbling on a cookie, stirring her tea, but not interrupting. We took turns talking, each telling parts, adding to and clarifying the story. Once or twice, Felix lapsed into German. I finished my tea, staring at the leaves at the bottom of the cup.
    “You mean to tell me,” Frau Gamperl said when we were done, “you two made it back here on your own?”
    We nodded.
    “Hmm,” she said. “You’re tougher than I thought.” She stood up and wiped her hands on her apron, even though they looked spotless to me. “Give me your parents’ numbers,” she said. “I’ll keep trying until I get through. Although it sounds like what we really need is a good immigration lawyer.”
    “Lawyer!” Felix said, suddenly looking up. “I have an idea.”
***
Dad, Katarina, and Rasheed’s mother, Frau Kumar, all ended up arriving at Frau Gamperl’s within five minutes of each other. We had to tell the entire story again—only this time, Frau Kumar took notes.
    “I don’t understand,” Katarina said when we were done. “Sara had all her papers in order. What about the passport thieves? Why didn’t they arrest them?”
    “They were probably gone, jumped off the train as soon as it stopped,” Frau Kumar explained. “Maybe they had a friend waiting for them with a car. I’ve seen situations like this before. Sadly, the police rarely believe the refugee.”
    “What can we do?” I asked.
    “The first step is to locate her,” Frau Kumar said. “Are you sure she hasn’t called?”
    Katarina shook her head[JL477][KL478]. “There’s no message on the machine.”
    Frau Kumar sighed. “They are supposed to allow a phone call. I’ll see what I can do tomorrow. The best thing now is for everyone to go home and get some rest.”
    We tried. No one ate much at dinner. My mom called while I was doing the dishes[JL479][KL480], but Dad talked to her for a long time first.
    “What a traumatic experience!” Mom exclaimed when Dad finally handed me the phone.
    “Yeah.”
    “Dad and I are so proud of you,” Mom continued. “You didn’t panic. You and Felix figured out how to get home.”
    As awful as it had been, I was a little bit proud of myself too. Felix and I had handled it. “Mom, we have to find her!”
    “You will,” Mom said. I wished I had her confidence.
    I was exhausted by the time I finally crawled into bed, but I couldn’t sleep. My limbs felt heavy and achy, as if I had the flu, though I knew I didn’t have a fever. This is what it feels like to be Sara, I thought to myself. To not know where your loved ones are. To not know if they are safe.
    It was so awful I wasn’t sure I could survive it. I was about to go ask Dad if he still had those pills from Dr. Teresa, the ones for an emergency. This was surely an emergency! And yet Sara had been in the same situation every single night since I’d known her. And she’d survived. But I wasn’t as strong as her.
    I got up and went downstairs to find Dad. He was still sitting at the kitchen table in his pajamas, nursing a cup of tea, listening to the radio. “Couldn’t sleep?” he asked.
    I shook my head.
“Me either.” He poured me a cup of tea.     “I can’t . . . I can’t believe that happened.” Dad sounded horrified. “I’m so sorry. I never should have let you go with Sara alone on the train.”
    “It’s not your fault,” I said. “It might have happened anyway.”
    “Yes, but . . . if something had happened to you!”
    “But nothing did.”
    Dad sighed[SB481], but his shoulders were still tense. He drummed his fingers on the table, making the teapot rattle. “Becca, there’s something else I need to tell you.”
    “What? Did Sara—[JL482]”
    “It’s nothing to do with Sara,” Dad said. “Remember when I told you I didn’t buy the tickets to Les Mis because I was worried you might get nervous?”
    “Yeah.”
    “The wasn’t the whole story. The truth is, I was worried I might get nervous. That you might get upset and I wouldn’t know what to do. I was so afraid that the evening might not turn out exactly as planned, I decided that I’d rather not do it at all. That decision left me feeling so bad, I called Dr. Teresa and asked her to recommend another therapist. For me. So maybe I could deal with some of my own anxiety.”
    “You went to a therapist too?” I asked.
    Dad nodded. “For about a year, once a week, after work. And it really helped! In fact, she helped me see that I’d been too hesitant to take some risks in my own life. That’s what moving to Vienna was about. And I thought that maybe by moving, by dealing with some of my own fears, I could finally be a better parent to you.”
    “But Dad,” I burst out, “you’ve always been a good parent.”
    “I don’t know about that,” Dad said. “Do you ever think about that first plane ride? The one when we went to visit your grandparents.”
    “Of course.”
    “Sometimes I think I shouldn’t have rented a car to drive us all home. What if we had just taken our flight home as planned? Maybe you wouldn’t have developed so many fears if I hadn’t given in to them.”
    “Dad . . .”
    “And the bike. [KL484]When I tried to teach you back in Virginia, I was all, ‘Watch out!’ and ‘Don’t hurt yourself!’ No wonder you found it hard to learn.”
    “It’s okay, Dad. I did learn.”
    “Even the au pair! I’m mean, did you really need a babysitter this summer?”
    “Yeah,” I said. “I definitely needed Sara!”
    Dad sighed.
    “Dad, you did the very best you could!” I insisted. “But why didn’t you tell me about the therapist before?”
    Dad shrugged. “I don’t know. I wanted you to think I had everything under control.”
    I thought about that. “You know, Dad, I used to think the purpose of my Doomsday Journal was to make me feel in control. I thought if I could just research and plan everything, I wouldn’t ever feel nervous. But now, I don’t think that’s why it works. I mean, no way in a million years would I have thought to put in a page about what to do if your au pair get kidnapped by the police because someone stole her passport.”
    “Yeah.”
    “Maybe the point is to know that whatever happens, I’ll be able to cope. And somehow, putting my problems and fears down on paper makes them smaller. They’re no longer overwhelming—they’re just black-and-white words on a page. I think the thing I’m actually most afraid of, is being too anxious to do all the things I really want to do.”
    Dad was silent for a long time.
    “Say something,” I urged.
    “Tomorrow,” Dad said slowly. “I’m going to have to go buy a journal.”
    I smiled[JL486][KL487].
    “Think you can sleep now?” he asked.
    “Yeah.”
    “Me too.” Dad stood up and put our cups in the sink.
    I reached over to turn off the radio, when something made me pause. The song on the radio sounded familiar. I listened a moment longer before it hit me—the station was playing La Traviata.
    I got goose bumps again, just as I had at the opera. This was a sign. Everything was going to be okay. Sara would come back to us! Well, either that or she would die of tuberculosis. But we had antibiotics now, so that seemed unlikely.
    The music swelled, washing away my fears. I turned off the radio and Dad switched off the light. We walked silently up the stairs. Before I went into my room, Dad stopped and said, “Becca, I am so lucky to have a daughter like you.”
    And when I climbed into bed, I swear I could still hear the music.[SB489]

