 37
The Heartbeat of the Universe
It was hard to believe it had been a week since I’d seen her. Her stained T-shirt was gone. Instead, she wore light-blue sweatpants and a sweatshirt, both too large. Her eyes were big and sad. Her green lock of hair hung like a new leaf on a branch over her forehead.
    I ran and gave her a hug.
    That’s when she started to cry. “You came,” she whispered. “You came.”
    “Of course!” I said. “You’re family.”
    Everyone else wanted a hug too. Katarina had wisely brought some of Sara’s own clothes and a hairbrush. She went to the bathroom to change and came out looking more like herself, in black jeans and a gray T-shirt.
    “Oh!” I said[JL521][KL522]. “I kept this safe for you.” I handed her a folded piece of notebook paper.
    Sara knew what it was without even unfolding it. “My list!” she exclaimed. “Where?”
    “I found your purse with the strap cut in the train bathroom. It was empty, except for a ponytail holder. And your list. That’s how we knew something was wrong!”
    “List?” Dad asked. “What are you talking about?”
    “We all made lists,” I explained. “Sara had stuff she wanted to do when she went back to Bosnia and saw her family again. I wrote down stuff I wanted to try, like . . . learn to ride a bike.”
    “It’s why I agreed to go to the Heuriger,” Felix admitted. “Have a birthday party was on mine.”
    I could tell Dad wanted to ask more questions, but at that moment, a guard came in with some papers for Katarina to sign and a plastic bag full of Sara’s belongings. As if she had been in jail! Sara opened the bag, pulled out her necklace, put it on, then threw her old stained T-shirt and jeans in the trash, as if she never wanted to look at them again. Another woman came in with a folder full of papers; she and Katarina whispered back and forth in German for a long time.
    Finally, the woman stood up, and it seemed like we were all going to be able to go home.
    But at the last moment, yet another guard came in and whispered in Frau Kumar’s ear. “Wait a moment,” she said. “I’ll be right back.”
    Frau Kumar followed the guard out of the room. No one spoke. I reached out and held Sara’s hand.
    “Are you hungry?” Katarina asked.
    Sara nodded.
    “We made goulash yesterday. There’s lots of leftovers,” I said.
    “And no bugs this time,” Felix added.
    Sara gave a weak smile. “Why taking so long?” she asked, in a voice so low I almost couldn’t hear her.[SB523]
    “I’m sure it’s just a formality,” said Dad.
    “They probably need another signature or something,” Katarina added.
    Still, it felt tense. It was an ugly little room, with nothing on the walls. What if they changed their minds?
    Finally, the door opened again, and Frau Kumar entered.
    “Everything okay?” Sara asked desperately.
    “With your case . . . yes, yes. It’s fine.” Frau Kumar had an odd look on her face. “It’s just . . . there’s been a development.”
    “What kind of development?” Dad asked.
    “Did they catch those thieves who stole her passport?” I asked.
    “No, unfortunately not. However, there is a person . . .” She looked down at her notes. “Actually two people who claim to know Sara.”
    “I not understand,” Sara said.
    “Apparently, all the detainees have been talking about the young woman who speaks many languages.” Frau Kumar glanced at the paper again. “Sara, do you know Petra and Eldin Tahirović?”
    We all looked over at Sara. 
Her green eyes were so wide.     “That’s my mama and my little brother.”
    “Well, they’re here.”
    “What?” Katarina demanded.
    “Where?” Dad asked.
    “In a different section of the building. I think they’ve been here a couple of weeks.” She flipped through her notes. [JL524][KL525]“It’s a little unclear.”
    “May I see them?” Sara asked.
    “I can do better than that,” Frau Kumar said. “There’s a lot of overcrowding here. If someone were to vouch for them, agree to pay for the costs of housing and feeding them while they applied for TPS benefits, I might be able to get them released.”
    “Released?” Sara asked.
    “Meaning they could go home with you. Today.”
    “Yes, of course. I’ll vouch for them,” Katarina said.
    “You can put my name down as well,” Dad said.
    Frau Kumar smiled broadly then. “Okay, then, if you can be patient a few more minutes . . .”[SB526][KL527]
    She left the room. Sara was crying again. I went over and put my arm around her. “Sara, it’s okay,” I whispered. “You’re gonna see your mom again. And your brother. We can bake him a cake!”
    “And your little brother can sleep on my top bunk,” Felix offered.
    Katarina nodded. “You can all stay as long as you—”
    The door opened again, and we all jumped. But it was only Frau Kumar. She was grinning from ear to ear. “Sara, if you’d come with me. We thought it might be better not to overwhelm them with everyone at once. Your family is waiting in the next room.”[SB528][KL529]
***
Sara’s mother, it turned out, was short and thin, with an angular face and green eyes like her daughter. Her long dark hair was arranged in a messy bun, with streaks of gray spread across it like a spiderweb. She wore the same light-blue sweats as Sara. Katarina kept apologizing for not bringing her extra clothing, even though we hadn’t known she would be there.
    Sara’s brother still had a baby face, with big round eyes and chubby cheeks. When I met him, he was holding Sara’s hand and refusing to let go.
***
By the time we all made it home, it was late afternoon. We put a big spread on the table: goulash and rice and Semmeln. But the meal, which I’d been so eagerly looking forward to in the car, imagining it as a heartful reunion full of hugs and laughter, like the time when Jimmy was finally reunited with his twin brother, Johnny, on Love on the Evening Tide, turned out to be kind of awkward.
    Mrs. Tahirović and Eldin spoke no German, so Sara had to translate whenever they wanted to say anything, even “Pass the salt.” Eldin gobbled up everything in sight, stuffing goulash and bread into his mouth, until halfway through the meal, he threw up. Sara changed him into some of Felix’s outgrown clothes, then settled him down on the couch to watch TV, where he promptly fell asleep. Mrs. Tahirović drank a cup of coffee but ate little and said even less. “Mama says her tooth hurts,” Sara explained finally. “She broke it a couple of months ago and . . . she’d like to go lie down.”
    “Of course,” Katarina said. “The bed has clean sheets. And I’ll make an appointment at the dentist for tomorrow.”
    Sara carried her sleeping brother upstairs, her mother following slowly. “It’ll be all right,” Dad said as Felix and I cleared the table and helped with the dishes. “After all they’ve been through, they’re just going to need some time to adjust.”
***
Sara came down in the [KL531]early evening and asked Felix and me if we wanted to take a walk. The three of us headed off into the vineyards. The sun was warm, and the fields smelled slightly of manure. A light breeze rustled the grape leaves. We walked for a long time without saying a word.
    “Do you want to talk about it?” I asked.
    “No,” said Sara. “And yes. It was so scary when they took me off the train! I’m sorry I left you there alone.”
    “It’s not your fault!” I insisted.
    “We were fine,” Felix added.
    “They were supposed to let me make a call, but . . . the border police said I be allowed to at the detention center. And at the center, they said I should have already made my call!” She shook her head.
    “What was it like in detention?” Felix asked.
    “There were two other women in my room, both older than me. One woman sat there and stared at the wall. Rumor was her daughter had been taken by the Serbian Army. I never heard her say a word. The other woman was nice, a little younger than my grandmother, but she spoke absolutely no German, so I had to explain what was going on. She not even understand we were not in real jail, just Schubhaft.”
    “What’s Schubhaft?” I asked.
    “It just means being detained because we had crossed the border illegally, not because we had committed any other crime.”
    Felix snorted. “Still sounds a lot like jail to me.”
    “I guess it was,” Sara said. “The cell had wooden platforms for beds. There was a thin mattress and a blanket on each one. The blankets were kind of dirty, but we got three meals a day. We had to eat everything with a spoon.”
    “Sounds awful!” I said. “I’m so sorry, Sara.”
    “The worst part was, there was nothing to do. The older woman had a deck of cards, and there was one Heimatroman[JL532][KL533].”
    “That’s like a romance novel,” Felix explained.
    “Yeah. A lawyer moves to a tiny Alpine village and falls in love with a milkmaid. It was pretty bad, but I read it three times.”
    “Did they ever let you out of the cell?” I asked.
    “Once a day, we went outside and walked around in the courtyard. It was never for very long, but I got to talk to some of the other prisoners. Most of them were also from Bosnia, but I was the only one who spoke good German. I sometimes got extra time outside because the guards liked that I could understand them.”
    “You never saw your mom or Eldin?” Felix asked.
    Sara shook her head. “They only let a few of us out at a time. But I asked everyone about them. I guess word got around that I was there.”
    We’d reached the top of the hill by that point. We could see the trees of the Vienna woods just off in the distance. After a moment, we turned around to go back home.
    “Were you scared?” I asked.
    “I was so scared,” Sara said. “But I kept thinking about the bridge in Prague. I imagined you were both there, holding my hands.”
    We held hands again, Felix on one side of Sara, and I on the other. We walked back down the hill in the golden twilight.
    “The worst part,” Sara whispered, “is that Mama will not talk to me. All I know is that they only got my first letter with the old address. They decided to leave, and things did not go as planned.” Sara started to cry. “I wish she would tell me more. Whatever horrible things happened, not knowing feels worse.”
    I squeezed her hand. We walked in silence for a long way. But it was a good quiet, not a bad one. Then Felix started to sing: “Di quell’amor ch’è palpito dell’universo intero.”
    Sara was so shocked, she stopped walking. “Felix, you have a beautiful voice!”
    He blushed. “My father taught me to sing a little.”
    “You should sing more,” Sara said.
    Felix shook his head.
    “Come on,” I urged. “There’s peppermint tea at home.”
    And we walked, Felix and Sara and I humming bits of the opera, listening once more together to the heartbeat of the universe.

