 9
The Streetcar, the Cathedral, and the Royal Hamburger
The streetcar, or Straßenbahn (as Felix informed me it was called in German), looked like a skinny bus with rounded edges, white on the top, red on the bottom. It was connected to an electrical line overhead and ran on rails embedded in the street. On the top of the curved white roof was a round black-and-white sign with the number 38. Underneath that was the word “Schottentor.”
    The doors slid open, and I followed Felix and Sara up the stairs. Again, no one checked our tickets as we sat down. The seats were wooden, with two seats on one side of the aisle and single seats on the other. Felix and Sara took a double, and I took the single one across from them. The doors closed and we started off.
    The streetcar moved faster than the bus, zooming along in its own lane, ringing a bell to warn cars to get out of its way. I didn’t usually get nervous on public transportation, but the jerking and clanking made it seem like our compartment might break apart at any moment. At the end of the block, a car was [KL138]stopped squarely across the streetcar tracks in the intersection. The driver rang the bell and proceeded full speed ahead. I gripped my seat, wondering what the safety statistics were on streetcars. The bell rang again, a car honked, and the driver slammed on the brakes [SB139][KL140]so hard, I bumped into the seat in front of me.
    The streetcar driver cursed in German and gestured at the car. He rang the bell again, and the car finally moved out of the intersection. I sighed with relief, even though no one else seemed to think we were in any danger. Felix read his book calmly. Sara stared out the window.
    “Freud’s house.” She pointed when I caught her eye. “Museum.”
    “Sigmund Freud?” I asked, still clinging to my seat. “Founder of psychotherapy?”
    “Yes,” Sara said. 
    I could use some therapy after this ride! “Can we see his couch?” I asked.
    A huge cathedral came into view then, with two tall, skinny towers that pointed like fangs into the sky. Between them was a massive stained-glass window shaped like a rose. And just as suddenly as it had appeared, it was gone, as the streetcar dipped underground as if it had turned into a subway. It made my stomach lurch. I swear, the Straßenbahn was as bad as a roller coaster. Which, by the way, I do not enjoy.
    “Where are we now?” I asked.
    “Schottentor,” Sara said. “Come. We go see Stephansdom. It is a very old, very big cathedral.”
    “I think I just saw it.”
    “That’s the Votivkirche,” said Felix. “It’s barely a hundred years old. St. Stephen’s has been functioning as a church since 1160.”
    Over eight hundred years?!
    I followed the two of them off the Straßenbahn and up an escalator, where we jumped onto another streetcar, this one with a large number 1 on the top.
    “Ringstraße,” said Sara.
    “What does that mean?” I asked.
    “Literally, it’s Ring Street,” said Felix.
    “Why?” I asked. “Are there lots of jewelry shops?”
    Felix sighed, as if I were incredibly stupid. “You do know there used to be walls around cities in Europe, right?”
    “Of course,” I lied.
    “Well, there used to be a wall in Vienna too, forming a ring around the city to defend its citizens against invaders. By the mid-1800s, the Austrian Empire was strong and powerful; they didn’t need the wall anymore, so they tore it down and built a wide, majestic street around the inner city instead. Streetcar number one[JL142][KL143] takes you around it, past all the buildings they constructed on the reclaimed land.”
    “What kind of buildings?” [JL144][KL145]I asked.
    Sara pointed out the window. “Universität. Where I study German. Next is Rathaus.”
    “Rat house?” I asked. “Like a zoo for rodents?”
    Felix rolled his eyes. “Rathaus means city hall.”
    “Your local government meets in a rat house?”
    “Rat means advice[JL146][KL147] in German. The animal rat is Ratte.”
    “Oh,” I said.
    “Rat [JL148][KL149]is a false cognate,” Felix added.[SB150][KL151]
    “What’s that?”
    “A word that sounds the same but has a different meaning in another language.”
    “Oh.” German sounded confusing.
    “Like Gift,” he said.
    “Like a present?” I asked.
    “Nope,” said Felix. “In German it means poison.”
    Yup, it was definitely confusing. I was about to say so when I got a glimpse of the Rathaus. The building had five towers: a big one in the middle and two smaller ones on either side. There was a park in front of it, complete with food stands, as if there were a festival going on. And next to the building itself stood a giant movie screen.
    “They show movies?” I asked. “Like a drive-in theater?”
    “Opera movies,” Sara explained.
    Okay, this town was weird.
    Next to the Rathaus was the parliament, a Greek-style building with a statue of Athena, the goddess of wisdom, standing guard out front. The streetcar kept moving, zipping along, but there was so much to look at it was hard to feel scared.
    “Museums,” Sara said. “Natural history. Art history.” She pointed to the other side of the street. “The Hofburg.”
    “What’s that?” I asked.
    “A castle,” she said. “And Heldenplatz.”
    “Where Hitler gave his speech after marching into Vienna during the Anschluss,” explained Felix.
    I barely got a glimpse of Heldenplatz, only enough to see it was a vast, open space with a statue of a man on a rearing horse, before the streetcar moved on.
    Finally, we reached a large building with a green roof, multiple archways, and two statues of winged horses on either side of the roof. “The opera,” said Sara, and then she jumped up and pushed a button. The doors on the streetcar swung open. I hurried after her as she and Felix starting walking down a large street.
    And when I say they were walking down the street, I mean they were literally walking down the middle of the street. I gave them a horrified look. “You’re going to get hit by a car!”
    “Kärntner Straße is a pedestrian zone,” Felix explained.
    It took me a moment to realize what he meant. The road was made of cobblestones. There were fancy boutique-style shops on either side of us, lots of people, and a few delivery trucks, but no cars. I guessed it was safe and reluctantly stepped off the sidewalk.
    We window-shopped as we walked. Palmers appeared to be a fancy underwear store, like Victoria’s Secret on steroids. Embarrassed, I kept my eyes averted so I wouldn’t accidentally glance at their mannequins. Next to that was a Swarovski [JL152][KL153]shop with crystal vases and bowls in the window. I lingered by that one, gazing at a shelf of tiny crystal animals: sparkling elephants, lions, and giraffes. There were multiple cafés, their chairs and tables spilling out onto the cobblestones. A souvenir shop hawked Mozartkugeln, which seemed to be some sort of round candy wrapped in foil and plastered with Mozart’s face.
    “Unlike the ring,” Felix told me, “Kärntner Straße has been a road for hundreds of years.”
    There was something about walking on the paving stones, where people had walked for generations, that felt . . . well, interesting at the very least.
    “Where’s this cathedral?” I asked. “I still don’t see . . . Oh!”
    A huge tower suddenly loomed over the sky, attached to a gigantic, bulky base. The roof of the church was covered with multicolored tiles, which made a zigzag pattern that looked like a bunch of Ws. I didn’t have to be told this was Stephansdom. I could feel how old it was.
    A deep rumbling started and I jumped. Birds streamed out of the clock tower, circling overhead. The bells were ringing, so loud and powerfully I could feel the vibrations in my bones.
    “Legend has it that Beethoven realized he was deaf when he saw the birds fly out of the clock tower, but he couldn’t hear a thing.” Felix’s face was shining. He was clearly in his element. “The tower used to be the main lookout for the defense of the walled city. There’s even an apartment for the watchman who used to ring the bells if he spotted a fire.”
    “Really?” I asked.
    “Well, most of the bells are automatic now. The largest was originally cast from cannons captured from Turkish invaders in 1711. But there was a fire in 1945 at the end of the war, causing it to crash to the ground. It was recast using some of the original metal. They only ring that one on New Year’s Day.”
    “Wow.” I wondered what it sounded like. Deep and rich or high and shrill or—
    “The smaller bells have names from their old uses. Feuerin means fire alarm. Kantnerin called the cantors or musicians to Mass. Bierringerin . . .”
    “There’s a bell called Beer Ringer?” I asked.
    “Yeah.” Felix shrugged. “It was to tell the men drinking at nearby taverns that it was time to go home. Come on! You have to see the Christ with a toothache statue.” Felix led us around a corner and stopped in front of a statue of Jesus. “People pray in front of this statue when they have dental problems.”
    “Very funny,” I said.
    “Is true!” Sara insisted.
    I studied the statue. Jesus had his hands folded, one over the other. His head was tilted to one side, his mouth half-open, his eyes slits with heavy lids.
    “When the statue was put up, people thought Jesus’s expression made him look like he had a cavity,” Felix explained.
    It did look like Jesus had a toothache.
    “And come over here,” Felix urged. He led us to the front entrance and pointed to the wall just to the right of the door. “This is my favorite thing about the church.” There was nothing to see, except for a [KL155]letter and a number carved into the stone.
    “O5?” I asked. “What does that mean?”
    “It was the symbol of the Austrian resistance during World War II,” Felix explained. “Not all Austrians were Nazis, and some were outraged when Hitler marched into Vienna. In German, Austria is Österreich. The first letter is Ö, which is an O with two little dots over it.”
    “Called umlaut,” Sara said.
    “Ö can also be written OE,” Felix continued. “And E is the fifth letter of the alphabet, so O5 stands for Austria.”
    “Cool,” I said. “How do you know all this stuff?”
    “I like to read about Austrian history too.”
    We finally went inside the grand entryway. It was cool inside the church, as if we were entering a cave. I was already overwhelmed by so many new things. Everything seemed so ancient. Even the bell was older than the United States. I sat down in a pew, my head spinning.
    The O5 reminded me that fifty years ago there had been Nazis in Vienna. My grandparents on my dad’s side were Jewish, but they had emigrated from Poland in the 1920s, before the war. What if they hadn’t left then? Would they have been sent to a concentration camp? Would they have been killed? What might have happened to Sara if she hadn’t left Bosnia?
    It suddenly felt even colder and I shivered. I was glad when Sara said it was time to go.
    “You okay?” she asked as we walked out into the bright sunlight.
    “Yeah.” It felt too complicated to explain my thoughts. “I think I just need to eat something.”
    “Okay,” Sara said, pulling out the envelope from my father. “Where?”
    I looked around. There were so many bustling cafés. My throat got tight. Every place had a menu I couldn’t read. Food I wouldn’t recognize. Customs I didn’t understand. And she wanted me to choose!
    Then I saw it. A little piece of home. A golden M. “McDonald’s!”
    “McDonald’s?” asked Felix.
    “Yeah.” I was as surprised as he was. I didn’t even like McDonald’s very much. But my mom and I had eaten there at the airport and . . . “I know it’s not very fancy, but I just need something familiar.”
    “No, no,” said Felix. “I’m excited. ’Cause my mother never lets me go!”
    We pushed open the door to McDonald’s, and I immediately felt more at home. The booths were red-and-yellow plastic; the air smelled of fries and grease. It took me a minute to realize a Quarter Pounder was called a Hamburger Royal in Austria. Even the burgers were fancy here!
    Sara doled out the money from my father’s envelope, and we sat down at a table with our food. Felix pulled out his book, and I finally started to relax. Sure, we had to pay for ketchup, and my Coke was only eight ounces with no ice. But the burger tasted exactly the same as the ones at home. There were even enough seats, so we didn’t have to share a table with some stranger.
    Except there was a guy at another table who kept glancing over at us. He looked about Sara’s age, with a short scruffy beard and dark hair, gelled as if he were auditioning for a boy band. He wore jeans and a soccer jersey. “Sara,” I asked, poking her with my elbow. “Do you know that guy?”
    She turned to look, and the guy immediately grinned. “Hallo, Sara!” he called out.
    Sara waved back and blushed. “Yes,” she whispered as he walked over to us. Felix peered suspiciously over the top of his book.
    “Ich habe die grüne Haare gesehen,” he said happily. “Wie geht’s?”
    “Gut,” Sara answered. “Can we speak English, please? Becca not speak German.”
    “Sure,” he said. “You’re au pair, right?” he asked Sara.
    “Yes. This is Becca. She arrived yesterday. This is Felix. This is my friend Marco. We take German lessons together.”
    He slid into the booth next to Sara. “Nice to meet you,” he said. “Where you from?”
    “United States,” I said.
    “Ooh!” he said. “I learn English watching Fresh Prince of Bel-Air.”
    I laughed. “Where are you from?”
    “Firenze.”
    I looked at Felix. “Florence,” he translated. “It’s a city in Italy.”
    “My parents came to Austria five years ago to open a gelato shop,” Marco explained.
    “What’s gelato?” I asked.
    “Italian ice cream,” Marco said. “Best in the world.”
    “Mmm,” I said. “I love ice cream.”
    “Me too,” Marco agreed. “Until I start working in an ice-cream shop.”
    We all laughed.
    “So.” He turned to Sara. “In class you say you like to dance, right?”
    “Yes, in Sarajevo I took ballroom lessons.”
    Marco pulled a postcard out of his pocket. “I dance too. My neighbor owns a dance studio. She’s Hungarian.” He handed Sara the postcard. “I help with teen ballroom class. We need a new female assistant.”
    “Ich soll unterrichten?” Sara asked. I guess she was so surprised she lapsed into German.
    “You be great teacher,” Marco coaxed. “No pay, but you get free dance lessons. And I take you out for ice cream.”
    Sara smiled. “Sounds fun.”
    “Great.” He glanced at his watch. “Lunch break is over. I must go back to my father’s shop. Serve more ice cream to tourists. I call you to work out details.”
    Sara nodded.
    “Ciao!” he said as he walked off.
    “He’s kind of cute,” I said once he had gone out the door.
    Sara blushed. She tucked the postcard into her purse.
Oh yeah. She liked him.     
    “I’d like to learn to ballroom dance,” I teased.
    “I would not,” said Felix.
    “But this class comes with free ice cream!” I pointed out.
    They both laughed.
    I was done eating by then, but when I looked around for a trash can, I couldn’t find one. “Where do I put my trash?" I asked.
“Leave on table,” said Sara.      
“That’s rude,” I said. “And it makes more work for the cleaning crew.”	    
    Felix closed his book. “You can’t throw away your own trash.”
    “Why not?” I asked.
    “You might recycle it wrong!”
    “So . . . in Austria they trust people to pay for a bus ticket but not to throw away their own trash correctly?”
    Felix and Sara nodded.
    This was clearly an odd country.
    After lunch, Sara asked if I wanted to go to the Prater. I shrugged and said okay. But I should have followed my rule about visiting new places (DJ #3, p. 12), which is to always ask lots of questions. Because the Prater wasn’t another church or museum or historic building. Oh no! It turned out to be something truly horrible and terrifying.
    The Prater was an amusement park.

