3
the Deal
The question was, how could I get into the Russian lady’s house and find something, a membership card or another newspaper, that would prove she was the communist? Even though she lived next door—and had for years—we weren’t exactly friendly. I needed a reason to go and talk to her.
    On the first of October Sister Ann provided me with the perfect excuse. Every year St. Joe’s raised money to send to Catholic missions around the world by having a magazine sale. The Russians were our allies during the war, you know. They helped our boys liberate Poland and Hungary and Czechoslovakia from the Nazis. But once the war was over, the Soviets stayed and took over the local governments in those countries. As Sister Ann put it, “It is a race to save the souls of all those poor people in Eastern Europe from the Red Menace, those godless communists in the Soviet Union.” That was why we needed to support the missions—to fight the spread of communism, to help stop its slow creep across Europe.
    In any case, we were supposed to go door-to-door to all our friends and neighbors to see how many magazine subscriptions we could sell. So that night after dinner I set out. My plan was to visit everyone on Mary Lou’s paper route, saving the Russian lady for last. The truth was, now that I was actually going to do it, I was a little scared. I mean, I’d never spoken to a real live communist before. It was like I was in the movies and I was on a secret mission.
    The first few families each purchased several magazines. Ma and Pa bought Woman’s Day[CE77], American Rifleman[CE78] and Boys’ Life [CE79](for their grandson, of course). I felt a little envious. He only visited them on holidays and in the summer, and yet they were willing to pay for the magazine for the whole year. I imagined them saving the extra issues in a closet, and presenting them to him when he arrived.
    I moved on to the next house, but the old lady I visited there refused to buy a thing—not even Look[CE80] or Life[CE81] and everybody bought those. I couldn’t get her to budge, not until I mentioned my poor sister Mary Lou, and how she was still in the hospital. Then she couldn’t pull out her wallet fast enough. I felt a little guilty about that, but I shook it off.
    The seamstress, Mrs. Scully, bought three subscriptions: Life, House & Garden [CE82]and Model Railroader[CE83].
    “Who’s that one for?” I asked.
    “Oh,” said Mrs. Scully, blushing a little. “Model Railroader is for me.”
    “Really?” I asked.
    She nodded. “My husband”—she crossed herself—“God bless his rotten soul. When he wasn’t spending all his money on booze, he bought model train cars. Hundreds of them. He had a whole basement full of them.” She shrugged. “Funny, it bugged me no end when he was alive. But now, I kind of like them.”
    It was fully dark by the time I walked up the path at the Russian lady’s house. Except it wasn’t really a path. There were no paving stones, just a piece of plywood thrown over a big muddy patch in the front yard. There was accordion music coming from inside, a lively polka. She sounded as good as Dick Contino. If I could sell her a magazine, it would give me an excuse to come to her house again. And if I could search her house and find another newspaper, or a communist party membership card or a telegram from Moscow, maybe I could use that evidence to clear Mr. McKenzie’s name.
    I had to knock on her door three times before she answered it, wearing a shapeless dress so faded, I couldn’t tell what color it might have once been. “Why should I buy?” she asked when I finished my pitch. Her wispy, white hair swayed in the evening breeze like cobwebs.
    I lowered my eyes and put a pious yet tearful look on my face. “You know, my sister Mary Lou is still in the hospital.”
    “I know,” she said. “Does her no good if I buy copy.”
    That may have been true, but no one else had dared to say it. “Well, then, uh . . . Life tells you what’s going on in the world.”
    “In English. I no read good.”
    “What?” I asked. “You get the paper.”
    “To learn!” she said. “To see pictures. Read headlines.”
    “Well, that’s fine then. Life has lots of great pictures!”
    She gave me a funny look.
    “You don’t have to read it,” I insisted.
    “No,” she said firmly. “Why I buy magazine I no read? Stupid.” She crossed her arms in front of her huge bosom.
    “Maybe you should learn to read English.”
    “Of course I should learn.” She sighed. “Why you think I get paper for five years!”
    “Can I come in and show you—”
    “No!”
    “Well,” I said slowly, coming up with an even better idea, one that would definitely get me in her house. “I could teach you to read English.”
    “You?”
    “Sure.”
    “I no take charity,” she said.
    “Oh it wouldn’t be charity,” I said. “We’d trade.”
    “Trade what?”
    I thought fast. I couldn’t exactly ask her to teach me all about communism. But I did remember the music I always heard coming from her house. “I’ll teach you to read English,” I said. “And you can teach me to play the accordion.”
    I grinned.
    She gave me another funny look. “You want learn accordion?”
    “Of course!” Actually, I’d never considered it before. But I remembered Mom playing the Dick Contino records around the house. I was pretty sure she’d love the idea.
    “Okay,” she said finally. “I buy The Saturday Evening Post[CE84].” She grinned back at me, her mouth full of rotten teeth. “Such pretty pictures. You come by Sunday afternoon, we start our lessons.”
    It wasn’t until I was walking in my front door that I realized I’d committed to going into a communist’s house. To spend time with her. She might corrupt me. Brainwash me into becoming a supporter of the Soviet Union. It felt dangerous—and a little bit exciting too.
I was right. Mom loved the idea when I told her about it the next evening after dinner.
    “Yes, yes,” she exclaimed, “then you can play carols at Christmas. And ‘Auld Lang Syne’ on New Year’s Eve! Just like Busia [CE85]used to do.” Her eyes brightened at that. “Come with me.”
    I followed Mom into the hall and up the little pull-down ladder that led into the attic. We rarely went up there. There were just a bunch of boxes, including one of Dad’s old papers from his semester at college. Every time the paper drive rolled around, Mom begged him to get rid of it. But he never did. I think having it there made him feel smart.
    We climbed past the boxes. You had to be careful in the attic. There wasn’t really a floor, only boards laid across the rafters. If you accidentally stepped off the wooden planks, you’d go straight through the ceiling.
    “There!” Mom pointed to a large, squat suitcase in the corner. 
    It took a bit of careful shoving and pushing, but finally I managed to get the suitcase down the ladder.
    “What is it?” I asked Mom, whose eyes were gleaming like Pinky’s when she’s given a lollipop.
    “Open it and see,” she said.
    I carefully undid the three rusted clasps.
    It was an accordion. A big, shiny one. The bellows flashed red, gold and green as I pushed the air in and out.
    “It was your grandfather’s,” Mom said, giving me a rare hug. “You never got to meet him, because he died before you were born. But he'd be so happy if he could see you with his accordion today.”
    And here's the worst thing about my mom’s moods: there she was, acting completely nice and normal. And instead of enjoying it, all I could think was, great, how long is it going to last this time?
