4
Tea for Two
Sunday[SB86] after church, I found myself lugging the accordion on my old red wagon next door to the Russian lady’s house. According to the paper route cards, her name was Mrs. Anastasia Glazov. It was October now[CE87] and the pumpkins in her vegetable garden were enormous. Carefully, I rolled the wagon over the plank that led to the front door. The plank rattled loudly and suddenly the door opened.
    “What you doing here?” Mrs. Glazov asked, hands on her hips. She was wearing either the same dress as before or another one that was equally faded.
    “I promised to teach you to read.”
    She scowled. “That lie you told to get me buy magazine.”
    “No,” I protested. “I’m here, aren’t I?”
    She gestured to the suitcase. “What this?”
    “An accordion.” I grinned. “You’re still going to teach me to play, right?”
    Finally, she threw her head back and laughed. “Fine. Come in. I make you tea.”
    So with a touch of fear and a touch of excitement (I was going to root out a real, live communist!) I ducked into her little wooden shack, lifting the accordion off the wagon and placing it just inside the door.
    The only light came from the window and one kerosene lamp. The walls were the same rough-hewn wood that could be seen outside. The room was neat and tidy enough, but there wasn’t much furniture, just a small wooden table and three plain, hard [CE88]chairs. Everywhere there were piles of magazines and newspapers. I didn’t see any copies of the Daily Worker, but surely she wouldn’t leave them out in plain view. A large, wood-burning stove sat in one corner. It heated the room, and I guess she also cooked on it.
    On the stove was a fat, barrel-shaped pot. But it was too pretty to be a normal kettle. It looked like copper, shiny, with little carvings all over it. On top of the barrel sat a teapot. Mrs. Glazov caught me looking at it.
    “My samovar,” she announced proudly. “Nazis take my old one, send me work camp. Me! Old woman. But I survive. And when I arrive in America first thing I do, I buy new samovar.”
    Mr. McKenzie had said he was in a camp with communists. She had to be the one! But I needed proof.
    “Sit!” she told me.
    So I did. Mrs. Glazov brought over a plate of tiny sandwiches, open-faced, with pats of butter. Some had ham or green vegetables that looked like cucumbers on top. On the table there was also a sugar bowl and a plate of lemons, sliced so thin you could practically see right through them.
    "Didn't think you come," she said, blushing.  "But hoped."
    I didn't know what to say. 
    “How you like your tea?” she asked.
    “Uhhh,” I said. I didn’t usually drink tea.
    “Not too strong for growing boy,” she said. She picked up a cup, or actually it was a half cup made of metal, and inserted a plain glass inside. Then she took the teapot from the top of the samovar and poured a thick black liquid into the glass. Only a little, just so it barely covered the bottom. Then she replaced the teapot and added some hot water to the glass from a little spout near the bottom of the samovar.
    “Now you drink,” she said.
    Drink? I didn’t want to drink. But if a cowboy was trying to make friends with a tribe of Indians, he had to smoke the peace pipe when it was offered. My heart was beating fast, faster than I expected. She was just a little old lady. But Soviet spies were devious. They could look like anyone.
    “Drink!” she ordered again.
    Automatically, I took a sip. It scalded my tongue and though I tried not to, I guess I made a face.
    “You add sugar and lemon.” She laughed. “Soon, you love it!”
    I waited a moment to see if I would suddenly collapse in searing pain. I mean, I didn’t really think she was trying to poison me, but imagining that she might be made the whole situation more exciting.
    When she started to pour herself a glass (she put a whole lot of the black stuff and only a little water in her cup) I figured I was probably okay. So I added about half the bowl of sugar and a bunch of lemon slices. When I took another sip, it tasted like hot lemonade.
    “Now,” she said, sitting down at the table, “you teach me read.”
    Oh yeah. I guess I’d kind of thought I’d find proof immediately and wouldn’t need to hold up my side of the bargain. But I’d been in her house a whole ten minutes and I hadn’t found a thing. “What do you want to read?”
    “You bring comic book?” she asked.
    “No.”
    “Boys always read comic book.”
    “Yeah, I like to read them but . . . I don’t have one with me today.”
    She sighed. “Bring next time. Today we start with paper.”
    “Which one?”
    She gestured at the piles on the table. “Take your pick.”
    I jumped up. This was my chance. I thumbed through every pile, but I didn’t find anything. Only the Chicago Tribune and some magazine in Russian that seemed to be devoted entirely to tea, cooking and flowers.
    “Tommy, I not know how read any of them. Pick one!”
    I finally grabbed a Tribune at random and pointed to a headline. “Uhhh. Sound this out.”
    What came out of her mouth made absolutely no sense. She sounded like Pinky trying to talk with a mouthful of marbles.
    “No,” I said. “It says, NEW RESTAURANT OPENS.”
    “Restaurant same word in Russian,” she said sadly. “But spelled all different.”
    “How do you write it in Russian?”
    She picked up a pencil and wrote in the margin of the paper: pectopah.[CE89]
    “Pectopah?” I said.
    “No,” she insisted. “Restaurant.”
    “But it starts with a p,” I said.
    “Start with r-r-r-r sound.”
    “P makes an r-r-r-r sound in Russian?” I asked.
    “Yes, of course!” she said. “Not in English?”
    “No,” I said.
    “Ahh,” she cried, resting her forehead on the table. “English too hard. By time I learn to read, I too old to see.”
    “No,” I scoffed. “You just need to start with the alphabet.”
    I wrote out the alphabet on the back of the paper and told her all the sounds. I had to admit, Mrs. Glazov learned fast. I went over the alphabet three times, all the English letters and the sounds they made, and by then she knew them pretty well. It was kind of fun. I was about to teach her a couple of words when she pushed the paper aside and said, “Now your turn.”
    “To do what?” I asked.
    “Learn from me,” she said. 
      [SB90]She stood up and pulled a huge accordion out from under the table. It was almost as big as she was, with black and white keys like on a piano running down one side and tiny buttons on the other.
    “No, no,” I insisted. “You don’t have to—”
    “I no take charity!” She hefted the accordion up like it weighed nothing at all and put the straps around her arms. Then she came back to sit on the chair.
    “First, you listen.”
    She started playing a song. A happy song, like the polkas Mom sometimes played on the record player. Mom used to have friends over and they’d play bridge and listen to the same records over and over again. Once, they’d pushed the tables aside and started dancing, right in the living room. She’d danced with my father first, and then me, six years old, till I was flying across the dance floor.
    When Mrs. Glazov finally stopped, she asked, “You like, Tommy?”
    “Yes,” I admitted.
    “You get yours out now,” she said.
    So I did. And she showed me how to hold it and pull the bellows out nice and smooth, and even play a chord or two. And the best thing was that while I was playing the accordion, I didn’t think about Mary Lou or Mr. McKenzie or my mom or anything else. I just focused on the music.
    When I was done with my lesson, Mrs. Glazov gave me a pumpkin to take home, twice as big as my head. Mom broke out in a huge grin when she saw it. “Get out the flour, Tommy. We’re going to make a pie.”
    As we mixed and baked, my thoughts were mixed up too. I knew communists were bad and evil. I knew they wanted to deny us, and even their own people, freedom of speech. Commies didn’t believe in freedom of religion either. Heck, they didn’t believe in religion at all. The Reds wanted to take all the businesses away from their owners and give them to the government. According to Mr. Sullivan, they might even be planning to drop an atomic bomb on Chicago! So why did I kind of like Mrs. Glazov? What was wrong with me?
