
the Birthday Dinner
I stood outside the front door for a moment, wiping my hands on my pants, trying to decide what to do. I wanted to go back to Eddie’s house, see the shelter his dad had built in case the Soviets dropped an atomic bomb on us. But if I didn’t show up for dinner on my birthday, my mother would call his mother, and that would just cause more problems. So I took a deep breath and opened the front door.
    My dad was sitting on the couch reading the paper, as if he couldn’t hear a thing. He was a foreman at Western Electric, and usually wore a suit and tie, with a shirt starched at the dry cleaner, even on the weekends. My dad was tall and thin and looked just a bit like Gary Cooper in High Noon[CE10]. I’d seen that movie five times when it was at the Tivoli.
    The screaming was coming from the kitchen. From what I could hear, it sounded like something Mom was cooking had not turned out the way she’d expected.
    “Hello, Tommy,” Dad said without looking up. The dark frames of his reading glasses made his face look even thinner than normal.
    “What’s going on?” I asked.
    “I’m not going in there to find out,” Dad said, turning a page of the paper.
    This was usually the best approach when Mom was in a bad mood. We all tried to stay out of her way. I was just about to sneak off to my room when Mom called, “Is that you, Tommy?”
    I groaned. Ignoring Mom when she asked you a direct question only made things worse. “Yeah, it’s me,” I said.
    Mom came to the doorway between the kitchen and the living room. She usually wore her long, black hair pinned up in a neat bun. But lots of strands had escaped the bun today and the flowered apron she wore seemed too bright for her tense mood. She put her hands on her hips. “Where have you been?”
    Dad rolled his eyes.
    “Don’t you roll your eyes at me!” Mom barked.
    “It’s his birthday,” Dad said. “You don’t need to interrogate him. He came home because it’s dinnertime.”
    Mom’s face turned red, a vein popping out on her forehead. “Dinner will be ready in a minute,” she shouted. “The first set of perogies didn’t turn out right!”
    Dad didn’t respond, just turned another page of the newspaper.
    “I’m sure they’re fine,” I said, trying to smooth things over. But as soon as Mom turned to look at me, I knew it was the wrong thing to say.
    “You don’t appreciate my effort?!” Mom snapped. Her normally hazel eyes blazed emerald green. “I was trying to make them perfect for you!”
    “I . . .” There was nothing I could say.
    Mom stomped into the kitchen and then came back carrying a pan of perogies. “You think they’re fine?[CE11] Take them!” She tossed a perogie into the air.
    It hit me on the stomach. I stared in surprise. Mom yelled all the time, but she’d never thrown anything before.
    My dad finally put the paper down. “Catherine!” A noodle hit him on the shoulder.
    Mom kept throwing. Soon there were noodles all over the floor, blending in with the beige carpet.
    “Stop it!” cried Dad.
    I giggled uncomfortably.
    “Oh, you think it’s funny, do you?” Mom asked.
    “No,” I said.
    But she was already storming back to the kitchen. She returned with the cake in her hands. “Then you might as well have the cake too!” She threw it. The delicate angel food cake crumbled against the living room wall.
    “That’s enough!” said Dad.
    It wasn’t even a little funny anymore. She was scaring me.[SB12]
    Mom disappeared once more and returned carrying a large shoe box. “And here’s your present!”
    She tossed the box onto the coffee table. It slid across the table and fell to the floor. The lid popped off and I could see the genuine leather cowboy boots I'd wanted inside.
    But getting the boots didn’t feel as good as I’d expected. It didn’t feel good at all.
    In the back room, I could hear my baby sister start to cry.
    At the sound of the crying, Mom seemed to collapse, as if she were a puppet and the string holding her up had suddenly been snipped. “I have a headache,” she said. “I’m going to sleep.” She stomped off and slammed her bedroom door.
    I looked over at Dad, but his expression was as blank as a cowboy playing poker.
    “What’s wrong with Mom?” I asked. I tried to keep my voice calm.
    Dad shook his head. “She’s just tired. She wanted to make your birthday special.”
    It was a lame excuse and I think he knew it, because he wouldn’t meet my eye.
    The baby kept crying, but Dad just knelt down and started picking up the perogies. So I went into the kitchen and mixed up a bottle [CE13]and walked into the nursery.
    If you asked me, my littlest sister Susie, who was three months old, still looked like a wrinkled raisin, but everyone else said she was cute. Her face was bright red, her tiny fists flailing as she fought off the covers.
    “Hey, Susie,” I said,[CE14] as[CE15] I picked her up. She quieted a little, and [CE16]I held her to my chest. She smelled nice, like baby powder. But then she shoved a fist into her mouth, sucked it twice, and began wailing again. I gave her the bottle, and she gurgled happily. It made me feel a little better.
    I carried Susie into the hall and stood still for a moment. My heart was pounding. So I hadn’t gotten my birthday dinner. So what? A cowboy wouldn’t be upset. Heck, I bet a cowboy didn’t even celebrate his birthday. But I was disappointed and even worse, I was mad at myself for feeling that way.
    What I really wanted was to talk to Mary Lou. She always made me feel better. I could hear water running and realized my older sister was probably hiding out in the bathroom, giving Pinky her bath. I knocked on the bathroom door. “It’s me.”
    “Come in,” called Mary Lou.
    I did, and closed the door behind me, giving a little sigh as I leaned against it.
    Mary Lou was sitting on a low stool next to the tub. She was thirteen, a year ahead of me in school, with brown hair she usually wore in braids. I guess she was pretty, but I could only tell because Eddie could never put two sentences together when she was around. I knew boys were supposed to think their sisters were dull and stupid, but I liked mine.
    Mary Lou smiled when she saw me, a big, happy, genuine grin, but I must have looked pale or something because she asked, "You okay?"
    “Fine,” I lied. “But Mom started throwing things!”
    “Shh!” Mary Lou whispered. “Tell me later. Not in front of Pinky.”
    Pinky was our other little sister, and she was four. Her real name was Roberta, but the nurse who had delievered her had remarked, “She’s so pink!” and the name had stuck.
    “Happy birthday!” Pinky exclaimed, splashing in the tub.
    “Thanks,” I said.
    “Mom made a cake!” Pinky added. “She said I could have a piece.”
    I didn’t know how to tell her that my birthday cake now lay smashed to bits on the living room floor. So instead, I changed the subject.
    “Look what I found,” I said brightly. I balanced Susie in the crook of one arm, and pulled the newspaper out of my back pocket. “A commie newspaper!”
    “Oooh!” said Pinky. She didn’t know what that meant, of course, but she’d caught my excitement. And she forgot about the cake, which, of course, was what I had intended.
    “Let me see that,” Mary Lou said.
    “Careful!” I said. “Your hands are wet.”
    Mary Lou wiped them on a towel and I handed the paper over. She scanned it quickly.
    “Where did you get this?” she asked.
    “Found it on the paper drive.”
    “Tommy, you have to get rid of this!”
    “Get rid of it!” I exclaimed, surprised. “But I wanted to show the boys at school.”
    “Why?” she asked. “Do you want them to think we're communists?”
    I laughed. “No one would think that.”
    “You should burn it,” she said, handing it back to me.
    “Well, thanks for your advice,” I said sarcastically. I was kind of disappointed. I’d thought she’d be excited too. Finding the paper was the best thing that had happened today.
    “I mean it! You're going to get in trouble.”
“Nah.”    
     “Tommy! Remember last month when you found the BB gun in the woods and—”[SB17]
    “Fine,” I sighed. “I’ll burn the paper.” But I was going to show it to the other boys at school first.
    
    After[CE18][KL19] Pinky and Susie had been put to bed, Dad and Mary Lou and I shared a tense and silent dinner of perogies sprinkled with carpet fibers. Mom had been right. They weren’t very good. The filling had turned out mealy, not at all like Busia used to make them.
    “Did you like the cowboy boots?” Dad asked gruffly, when we were nearly done.
    “Yeah,” I said. “Thanks a lot.”
    He nodded. I waited for him to say something about Mom throwing all the food, but he didn’t. Dad took off his glasses and I could see the fine lines around his eyes. He looked tired.
    After dinner, Mary Lou and I did the dishes and listened to The Lone Ranger on the radio[CE20]. I loved how it always started the same way: “Return with us now to those thrilling days of yesteryear!” and the music and the “Hi-Yo, Silver! Away!” I loved how the Lone Ranger’s best friend, Tonto, always called him ke-mo sah-bee, which means “trusted friend.” I loved how in thirty minutes the bad guys were caught and all the problems solved.
    When the program was over, Mary Lou shut it off. She smiled and the freckles on her nose and cheeks popped out. Sometimes, in the right light, her hair had just a tinge of red. “Hey, Tommy,” she said. “I’ve got something for you.” She pulled a small, newspaper-wrapped package out of her pocket.
    I smiled. Mom might be unpredictable, but I could always count on Mary Lou.
    “Take it, stupid,” she said, pressing it into my hands.
    I unwrapped it slowly.
    It was a silver star-shaped pin, just like the ones the sheriffs wore in the movies.
    “We might argue sometimes,” said Mary Lou. “But you’re still my favorite brother.”
    “I’m your only brother.”
    “Well, that too.”
    I gave her a hug. “Thanks, ke-mo sah-bee.”
    “Sorry you didn’t get a cake,” she said.
    I shrugged. “It doesn’t matter.” But it did. Who doesn’t want a cake on his birthday?
    “You know Mom,” she said, her voice just a little strained. “She’ll probably get up in the middle of the night to make you a new one.”
    “Yeah,” I said. “Maybe so.”
    Mary Lou yawned. “I better go to sleep,” she said. “Got to get up early to deliver those papers.”
    I nodded. “See you in the morning.”
    Boots padded over to me then and rubbed his head against my leg. I stroked his fur absently, then went to get ready for bed myself. I was just about to climb under the covers when I heard someone moving around in the kitchen. Mary Lou was right. Mom had gotten up to bake me another cake. The smell of angel food batter and sweet orange icing [SB21]lulled me to sleep.
