0
Talking Back
On the way home, Pinky and I huddled tensely in the backseat. Frankie Laine [CE100]was on the radio, singing the ballad from High Noon. Mom sang along.
    “Do not forsake me O my darlin’
    On this our wedding day.”[CE101]
    I couldn’t figure out what was going on. Mom seemed absolutely fine. Wasn’t she embarrassed about being in jail?
    Boots was waiting for us on the front stoop. I threw my arms around him and he licked my face. He followed us into the house. 
    Dad was sitting on the couch in the living room. His tie was loose around his neck, the furrow deep between his eyes. “Where have you been?” he fumed. “I’ve been worried sick.”
    Mom ignored him and breezed passed him. “Have to put the baby to bed,” she said, holding a sleeping Susie in her arms.
    Dad grabbed my shoulder, so hard it kind of hurt. “Where were you?”
    “Nowhere.”
    “Tommy, did you get in trouble again?” Dad asked.
    “No,” I said. “Mom went to pay her speeding ticket.”
    “Speeding ticket?” asked Dad.
    Oh crap[CE102]. She hadn’t told him.
    “Never mind,” I said.
    “Thomas, tell me what is going on.” His voice was calm, but behind his smudged glasses his eyes blazed with anger.
    I shook my head.
    “Thomas John Wilson, I—”
    Pinky piped up. “Mom got thrown in jail for saying bad words to the judge.”
    Mom picked that moment to come back into the living room. “What did you say?” she hissed.
    I pushed my sister aside and stood in front of her. “Pinky was just telling Dad why we were late.”
    “Are you making fun of me, Tommy?”
    “No!”
    “I think you are.” Mom pulled her hair out of its neat bun, put her hands on her hips and flounced around the living room, throwing her hair from side to side. “Look, how amusing! Mother was thrown in the slammer.”
    “Of course not, Mom,” I said.
    “It was humiliating!” she screamed. “And now you’re humiliating me again!” The vein popped out in her forehead.
    Boots walked over and sat down next to me, his warm body leaning against my leg.
    “Now, Catherine,” said Dad quietly. “Maybe we should just calm down and—”
    “Don’t you tell me to calm down! Why don’t you ever go to the hospital? Why don’t you ever go sit there with her?”
    In the bedroom, Susie started crying.
    “I’ll get her,” said Dad quietly.
    “Don’t walk out on me when I’m speaking to you!”
    “I’m not talking to you when you’re so upset,” said Dad. He picked up Pinky and left the room. Unfortunately, he didn’t take me too.
    “What are you looking at, Tommy?” she fumed.
    “Nothing,” I said.
    “You think, I deserved it, huh? I deserved to be thrown in jail like a common criminal. Because I lost my temper and—”
    “Well, cursing out the judge wasn’t exactly a good move!”
    I froze. One thing you never did to my mom was talk back. I knew what was coming next.
    "In the kitchen," Mom commanded. "Now!"
    She went off to get the belt. Boots looked at me with wide eyes. "Stay here," I told him. I went into the kitchen and pulled down my pants.
    When Mom started whipping me, I tried to make myself concentrate on normal things. The dirty dishes in the sink. The sound of water running in the bathroom. Pinky fussing as Dad rinsed her hair. But Mom just didn't stop. I could feel welts forming on welts on my butt. And when a lash went wild and hit my back, I couldn't help crying out.
    I heard a growl. I glanced over and saw Boots standing in the doorway. The belt hit my back again, at an odd angle, so that somehow the leather cut the skin.
    "Ow!" I cried.
    Boots started to bark.
    "Shut up!" Mom yelled.
    Boots crept closer and kept barking.
    "I said, shut up!" Mom kicked Boots aside. My poor dog slid across the kitchen floor and slammed into a cabinet. He whimpered once, but stopped barking. Mom kept hitting me.
    I hated her then. Maybe I had been rude, but Boots hadn't done a thing. He was just trying to protect me. I gritted my teeth.  No matter how much it hurt, I would not cry out again.
    Mom kept on. And Dad never came in to see if I was okay.
When she was done, Boots and I went out. Nowhere in particular. Just to walk. I couldn’t be in that house any longer. Somehow, I found myself outside Mrs. Glazov’s shack. I waited. Just standing there. It would have made more sense if she’d been playing the accordion, then I could at least have told myself I was listening to the music. But I wasn’t.
    After a few minutes, or maybe an hour, the front door opened.
    I jumped.
    “Who there?” she called.
    I didn’t answer.
    “I taking trash out to fire pit. I got no money.”
    She was afraid of me. She thought I was a hoodlum. Or a robber. Or worse. “It’s me,” I said.
    “Tommy?” she asked.
    "Yeah."
    “What you doing in cold? Come on in.”
    So we did. We went into the communist’s house. Boots curled up by the wood-burning stove while Mrs. Glazov made me a cup of the bitter tea. It tasted good. I guess I had learned to like it, just as she had predicted I would.
    “Need more lemon,” she said.
    “I’ll get it.” I jumped up, and my whole backside ached. I tried not to wince as I found a lemon and the cutting board and knife and started slicing.
    Mrs. Glazov cleared her throat. “You got blood on shirt.”
    I didn’t answer. Just concentrated on cutting those lemons as thin as she did.
    “Get in fight?” she asked.
    “Not exactly." I brought the lemons back to the table.
    "Show me."
    "No!" I protested. It was bad enough pulling down my pants for Mom.  I wasn't going to do that in front of Mrs. Glazov!
    “I help,” she said. She walked over to a shelf near the stove and came back with a bottle of iodine and a box of bandages. 
    There was that cut on my back, next to my spine. It hurt. I lifted my shirt and showed her that.
    She didn't say anything, just got to work patching me up. The iodine stung a bit, but she put the bandage on so gently, I didn't mind.
    “Aren’t you going to ask what I did to deserve a beating?” 
    “No,” she said. “You good boy, Tommy.”
    That was when I started to cry. “No, I’m not.”
    “You good boy,” she repeated. “Who else give old Russian lady English lessons just to sell stupid magazine I buy anyway?”
    “You said you wouldn’t.”
    “I lie.” She smiled. “I know about problems, Tommy. The Nazis not just throw me in camp. They kill my boys and my husband too. Now I never have no grandchildren. No family at all.”
    Mrs. Glazov had had a family? Sons? A husband? I’d never thought of that before. I’d pictured her always being dumpy and faded and old and alone.
    She shook her head. “No. You good boy. And good friend. The others, they call me communist.”
    It seemed so ridiculous then. Of course she wasn’t the communist. She was way too nice. And patient. In fact, her bossy kindness reminded me of Mary Lou.
    “I show you something,” she said.
    She stood up heavily and plodded over to a box in the corner. “Before I leave Russia, I save one box.” She rummaged through it, pulling books out and laying them anywhere. “Need to unpack, but . . .” She shrugged. “Too many memories. Aha!”
    Mrs. Glazov held up a small silver frame. “Many books, and one picture.” She brought it over for me to look at.
    It was a picture of a young, pretty woman with four boys gathered around her. The eldest looked about twelve, just like me.
    I glanced up at Mrs. Glazov. She had tears in her eyes, but under the wrinkles and white hair I could see she had once been the pretty woman in the picture.
    “Been long time,” she said quietly. “Thank you, Tommy. Good to see photo again.”
    Embarrassed, I went to put the books back in the box. They were nice ones, bound in real leather. “You need a bookshelf,” I said.
    “Can’t afford.”
    I picked up a small, red book and started to look through it. It was in some foreign language, I thought it might be German. I flipped back to the front page.  “I could build—”
    Suddenly, I froze. The title page read: Das Kapital by Karl Marx.
    This was a communist book. It was the communist book by the Karl Marx. The father of communism. The man mentioned in Guilty of Treason. This was proof!
    My hands began to shake. There, on the first page, was a name: Anastasia Glazov. I slammed it shut.
    “You okay, Tommy?” Mrs. Glazov said gently. "Need another bandage?" 
    “No,” I managed to choke out. I put the book back in the box. I hoped she didn't notice how my hands were shaking. “Just tired. I better go.”
Boots jumped up and followed me out.  My house was dark and I made it to my bedroom without seeing anyone. But as I slipped into bed, I started to cry again. She couldn’t be the communist. She just couldn’t.    


