1
Fishing
I didn’t know what to do. I barely managed to pull myself out of bed the next morning. On the paper route, Ma and Pa told me I looked pale and Mrs. Scully invited me in for a doughnut and a cup of hot chocolate. Even though it wasn’t that cold, I couldn’t stop shivering. If I turned in Mrs. Glazov, she might go to jail, or even the electric chair like the Rosenbergs! But if I didn't report her, Mr. McKenzie might lose his store.
    I didn't know what to do. I picked arguments with the choirboys twice on the playground, though when Eddie asked me what it had been about afterward, I couldn’t remember. I yelled at Pinky in the bath and fussed at Susie when she wouldn’t nap. She was five months old now and kept sitting up when she was supposed to be sleeping in her crib. I even snapped at Mary Lou when she reminded me to put a small plastic tarp over the basket for the papers when it rained.
    Boots was the only one I could tolerate. In the mornings, his nose was always warm against my cheek as he woke me up, usually just before my alarm. His quiet presence kept me company, even if it was cold or rainy, as I pedaled through the darkness, delivering the papers.
    The next Saturday at McKenzie’s was tense. Ever since the Halloween candy incident at school, Little Skinny wouldn’t speak to me. Mr. McKenzie must have noticed, but he didn’t say anything, just gave us jobs that kept us apart. I thought about how much fun we’d had carving the pumpkin and wished it could be like that again.
    Only three people came in all morning. One of them was Mrs. Glazov. “Hello, Tommy,” she said, friendly as ever.
    “Morning,” I managed to choke out, unable to look her in the eye. It was her fault Mr. McKenzie had no customers. Except it wasn’t. Not really. Mrs. Glazov might be the communist, but I was the one who’d put the newspaper in the store. I was the one who’d started the rumor.
    When Mrs. Glazov left, Mr. McKenzie, Little Skinny and I looked at one another. The floors were clean, the windows sparkling. Mr. McKenzie put up the CLOSED FOR LUNCH [CE103]sign and made us sandwiches early that day.
    "I still have some time," I said, as I chewed my ham-and-cheese. “Got any boxes to unload?” 
    Mr. McKenzie shook his head. “No point in ordering any more supplies if I can’t unload the stock I already have.”
    “Oh.”
    When I finished my sandwich, Mr. McKenzie sighed. “Might as well go on home, Tommy.”
    “See you next week,” I said, as I left.
    “Yeah,” said Mr. McKenzie flatly. “See you next week.”
    His tone felt like a knife at my back, urging me to make a decision. But I couldn't figure out which friend to save and which to sacrifice.
At home, Dad suggested we skip church the next day and go fishing. “Eddie and his dad are busy,” said Dad, “so it’d just be the two of us.”
    I knew this was an apology of sorts, for going off with Pinky and not helping me when Mom lost her temper five days before. I was still angry with him for that. But a fishing trip wasn’t offered often, so of course I said yes.
    The next day we were out of the house by seven. We didn’t talk at all in the car. When we got to Mud Lake, we parked the car at the side of the road and walked down a narrow, shaded path to the water. Dad carried the tackle box and I took the poles. He had a varnished- cane casting rod with a cigar grip and a Zebco spinning reel, and a whole collection of lures. I only had a simple bamboo pole with a fishing line and hook, but it worked all right.
    Mud Lake was really just a big pond, surrounded by reeds and bushes[CE104]. But it was quiet and usually deserted. Only the serious fishermen came out in mid-November. We sat down on the old wooden dock and started fishing.
    Dad and I didn’t talk much,[SB106] just “Pass the worms,” and “Do you have some more line?” and stuff like that. But it was a good quiet, calm and peaceful. I’d almost managed to stop thinking about Mrs. Glazov [SB107]when Dad cleared his throat and asked, “How’s it going with Mr. McKenzie?”
    “Fine,” I said.
    “I talked to him yesterday,” he said. “You can stop going after next week.”
    “Great.” But it didn’t feel great. I liked helping Mr. McKenzie. “No one goes there anymore anyway,” I said. “He doesn’t need the help.”
    “Yes,” said Dad. “It’s unfortunate. I hoped no one would believe those rumors.”
    A duck quacked in the distance. No one else was there. The sun shone on our faces. The wind whispered of winter, but it wasn’t quite cold yet. I believed, just for a moment, that I could get the guilt off my chest. [SB108]“It’s my fault.”
    Dad laughed. “Tommy, stealing is bad, but a few yo-yos won’t make or break a business. Officer Russo said some public schoolboy was playing a joke and—”
    “No,” I said. “It was me.” And then I told him.
    Dad’s hands gripped his fishing pole tighter and tighter, till his knuckles turned white. “Thomas John Wilson.” He shook his head.
    “I didn’t mean—”
    “You’ve destroyed a man’s reputation!”
    “I know. I feel terrible about it.”
    “Terrible!” Dad ran his hands through his hair. “Tommy, have you ever heard of Milo Radulovich[CE109]?”
    “Radulo-who?” I asked.
    “Milo Radulovich,” Dad continued, “was a lieutenant in the United States Air Force. He recently lost his job over communist allegations.”
    “Well, he must have done something to make them suspect him,” I said, trying not to remember that Mr. McKenzie hadn’t done a thing. It had all been me.
    Dad shook his head. “He did nothing[SB110]. His sister and father might have—might have—attended some sort of a communist meeting. Or read a communist newspaper. No one really knows because he was not allowed to see the evidence against him. Basically, he was found guilty by association. You’ve done the same thing to Mr. McKenzie.”
    If I felt bad before, I felt even worse now. But cowboys don’t admit they’ve made a mistake. They just press on. “I’m trying to make it better,” I argued. “I’ve found the real communist!”
    “What?” Dad turned to look at me and, if anything, he looked even more surprised than before.
    “Yeah,” I said. “It’s Mrs. Glazov.”
    “The Russian lady who lives next door?”
    And then it all came tumbling out. “I started giving her reading lessons so I could get inside her house and investigate and I found this book, Das Kapital, and now I don’t know what to do because she’s so nice and I don’t want to turn her in, but I don’t want Mr. McKenzie to lose his store either.”
    “Tommy,” Dad said sternly, “Mrs. Glazov is not a Soviet spy.”[CE111]
    “How do you know?”
    “You’re being ridiculous!”
    “That newspaper had to come from somewhere!”
    “Tommy!” Dad roared, as angry as I’d ever seen him. “No more of this investigating or pretending you are some sort of avenging cowboy who can just swoop in and make everything okay!”
    Dad never yelled. Never. His tone hurt more than his words. Thank goodness I pulled in a fish then, and another one, [CE112]in quick succession. I didn’t want to talk to him, or even look at him. Then I volunteered to gut the fish, even though I usually hate that part.
    While I cut up the fish, Dad prepared the fire, building a ring of stones and pulling out his cast iron frying pan. He hesitated a moment before he threw the match in.  As the flames licked the dry leaves and sprang to life, I wondered if he was thinking about Mary Lou. It was chilly and the fire felt nice, but it seemed wrong to enjoy something that had hurt my sister so much. 
    Later, after we had eaten the hot fried fish, Dad finally spoke again. “Tommy. We’ve all been under a lot of stress. The hospital bills for Mary Lou . . .” He trailed off.
    I knew she’d been in the hospital for two months now. I knew Dad was worried about how we were going to pay for that. I was worried about it too[SB113]. But I didn’t think that was why he had barked at me. “What about Mom?”
    “What about her?”
    “She’s always yelling and crying.”
    “Mom's always been like that.”
    “No. She's worse. She threw those perogies. And broke a vase. She even kicked Boots, when she was mad at me!”
    “Tommy, you provoke her.”
    “Dad, some days she forgets to do the dishes. Or get Pinky dressed!”
    He said nothing.
    “Something’s wrong with her. She insulted our guests at the party. She cursed out the judge!”
    “I already called the doctor,” Dad said quietly. “He couldn’t find anything wrong. We just need to give it time and . . . ignore her outbursts as much as possible.”
    How was I supposed to ignore getting beaten? “But—” 
    “I mean it, Tommy. You need to let it go. It’s not your problem. I don’t want you to worry about Mom. And I don’t want you to investigate this communist thing anymore.”
    “Fine.”
    We didn’t speak the rest of the way home.
