3
the Bookshelves
November 21 was my last Saturday at McKenzie’s. It was another quiet day at the store. After I’d done everything Mr. McKenzie had asked me to do, and even organized all his tin cans too, Little Skinny and I ate stale Halloween candy and read the papers.
    I kept thinking about Murrow and how he was trying to make things right. Maybe I didn’t know how to save the store or fix my mom, but I guessed I could try to apologize to Little Skinny. He was sitting a few feet away from me, the comics held up in front of his face like a shield.
    I cleared my throat. “So, uh, Little Skinny. I wanted to ask you something.”
    He grunted. He sounded just like his dad.
    “What’s The Adventures of Cowboy Sam?”
    “Nothing,” he answered, still hiding behind the comics.
    “Is it a story?” I asked. “A western?”
    “Maybe,” said Little Skinny.
    “Like The Lone Ranger? Or Kid Colt Outlaw?”
    “Yeah. Kind of like that.”
    “Cool.” I’d never thought about someone writing those stories. They just appeared in comic books at the drugstore. “Can I read it?”
    “No,” Little Skinny said, finally putting down the comics. “And why are you asking me all these questions?”
    I was trying to apologize. But somehow the simple words I’m sorry just didn’t want to come out.
    “You might as well go home, Tommy,” Mr. McKenzie said, walking over to us. “Don’t think I need you anymore.”
I knew this was going to be my last week.  But I felt kind of sad.     “Can I have a sandwich before I go?” I asked. “They're really good.”
    Mr. McKenzie looked surprised. “Okay.”
    Little Skinny shrugged. “I’m hungry.”
So we sat in the back room, with the root beers and the sandwiches. I chewed the thick bread carefully, savoring each bite.     And I realized, if I wanted to be a cowboy, I had to do what I knew was right. I had to turn in the communist. Even if I liked her. Even if she went to jail. I had to come up with a plan to get Mrs. Glazov's copy of Das Kapital and save Mr. McKenzie's store.
So the next day, Sunday, after I had given Mrs. Glazov her reading lesson and we had practiced the accordion for a while, I stopped playing and said, “I’m going to build you some bookshelves.” I said it real casual, like I had just come up with the idea.
    “You?” asked Mrs. Glazov doubtfully.
    “Sure,” I said. My heart was beating fast. I couldn't think too much about how I was going to trick her or I'd lose my nerve. “Bookshelves are easy. Mount some brackets on the wall, paint a few boards, you’re done.”
    Mrs. Glazov shook her head.
    “Come on,” I coaxed. “Don’t you have a few extra old planks out back?”
    She shrugged, so we trekked out to look. Sure enough, there were three or four long boards there. “These’ll do,” I said.
    I worked all afternoon in our garage, cutting and sanding the boards with my father’s tools. Dad and Mom knew their way around tools, so I’d never thought knowing how to cut and saw was anything special. But Mrs. Glazov watched, fascinated, as if I were performing a magical feat.
    And the whole time, I felt awful. Because I was deceiving her, pretending to be helpful, pretending to be nice, when the whole point of the bookshelves was to give me a reason to get my hands on that book. I was going to steal it from her and turn her in to the police. I was going to send an old woman to jail!
At least she’d get a fair trial by a jury of her peers. Unlike when the Soviets arrested someone. They tortured them. Manufactured evidence. Just look what had happened to Cardinal Mindszenty!     But had the United States done that too? Radulovich had lost his job because of rumors. And Mr. McKenzie—he had no customers because I’d played a stupid joke. Here I was, about to destroy Mrs. Glazov’s whole life, and she’d only ever been kind to me. But the difference between Mrs. Glazov and Radulovich was that I knew she was a communist. I knew it was the right thing to do. Even if it felt so wrong.
The next day after school, Mrs. Glazov gave me a quarter [CE124]and I rode my bike over to the army-surplus store. They only had one color of paint—olive green—so that was what I bought. Mrs. Glazov helped me paint the boards, putting on each coat carefully, and grinning like Eddie did when he was winning at marbles. “How I doing?” she asked.
    “It’s just paint,” I said, “you can’t really do it wrong.”
    “Your dad teach you all this?” she asked.
    “Yeah,” I said.
    “He handy.”
    “Yeah, I guess he is.”
    By the time the paint was dry, Mrs. Glazov was tired. I suggested she go take a nap while I finished things up. Her eyes drooped and she must not have been feeling well, because I hadn’t really expected her to agree but she went to the other room to lie down.
    So it was almost too easy. I put up the brackets and boards on the long wall while she slept. Then I opened the box and arranged all the old books on the new shelves. They fit perfectly, with just enough room at one end to display the framed photo. The small red book, Das Kapital, I slipped under my shirt.
    It burned like a hot coal against my chest.
    Mrs. Glazov walked back into the room then, her white hair wild about her head. “Still here?” She paused and glanced at the wall. Then she smiled and sat down heavily on one of the chairs at the table. “Thank you, Tommy,” she said finally, wiping her eyes with a corner of the tablecloth. “It looks wonderful.”
    It did. The light of her kerosene lamp glinted off the silver frame.
    “The paint is kind of an ugly color of green,” I mumbled.
    “It beautiful,” she said. “Color of grass along river at home.”
    Before I left, she gave me a big bear hug. I was terrified she was going to feel the book under my shirt.
    I walked down the street as slowly as possible. I had to turn her in. I knew that. I had to save Mr. McKenzie’s store. But in the movies they never told you how awful it felt to betray someone who had trusted you. Even if they had done something wrong.
    Officer Russo’s house was two blocks away. I knocked on his door and waited, my heart beating like I was the one who had committed a crime.
    “You need something?” The old lady next door poked her head out the window. “Officer Russo and his family went away for Thanksgiving.”
    Truthfully, I was relieved to put it off a little longer. “No,” I said. “That’s fine. I’ll wait till they get back.”
    At home, I hid the book in my closet and threw myself onto my bed. Boots snuck his head in under my arm. The whole situation made me feel sick. I wished Mary Lou were around. She’d know what to do. She'd been right after all. I should have burned the paper when I'd first brought it home.
