5
’Tis the Season
But despite my dizzy dreams on the dance floor, after Thanksgiving things didn’t get better, at least not with Mom. She seemed worse. Some days at dinnertime, I’d find the breakfast dishes still piled in the sink. Susie developed a horrible diaper rash. I started changing her when I got home from school and giving her a bottle in case she was hungry because Mom had forgotten to feed her. When I asked Pinky what she did all day, she shrugged. “Played with my dolls. Mom slept a lot.”
    The weird thing was, Mary Lou was doing better. She was finally learning to walk again. But Mom’s moods no longer seemed to have anything to do with Mary Lou’s condition. They were as random as a role of the dice in a saloon. Pinky got a wide-eyed look about her, like a rabbit startled by a rattlesnake. She never cried though, unlike Susie, who got colic so bad I thought she was never going to stop crying. And I had to hold it all together. It didn’t seem fair. I was the kid. Sometimes, at night, I wished more than anything that Mom or Dad would take care of me.
One day in early December, after school, I was waiting for Mom to pick me up when I saw Mr. McKenzie come out of the school building. Little Skinny was trailing behind him. They didn’t see me, but I wondered, were they going to the hospital too? Was his mother getting worse?
    The sun was shining, glaring off the snow, and Mr. McKenzie’s car was dirty. As they approached it, I could just make out a word someone had traced in the dirt on the grimy hood.
    Commie.
    Mr. McKenzie noticed it at the same time. I could tell, because he froze, like a bird on a branch when there is a cat in the yard. Little Skinny blushed, red as any Soviet.
    Mr. McKenzie picked up a handful of snow and scrubbed the words off the car. His fingers must have been freezing, because there were holes in his old brown gloves. Then he ushered Little Skinny into the car and drove off. My hands burned with cold, as if I were the one with the old gloves.
Later that afternoon, I lugged my accordion up the steps to Mary Lou’s room. My arms started to ache, but the smile on my sister's face when I finally got there made it all worthwhile.[CE129]
    “You’re going to play!” Mary Lou squealed.
    I grinned. “What do you want to hear?”
    “‘Hark! The Herald Angels Sing[CE130].’ It’s my favorite.”
    “I knew it,” I said, and began to play. My fingers trembled at first, but after a moment, Mary Lou started to sing. Her voice was soft, but sweet as a lollipop, and it gave me confidence. I played better, my fingers finding the right keys without me thinking about it. By the end of the song, three nurses had gathered in the hallway.
    As I played “Joy to the World,” “Angels We Have Heard on High,” and even “Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer,” more nurses and a few other patients gathered outside Mary Lou’s door. When I was done, everyone applauded. I caught sight of Little Skinny in the hallway, standing next to a pale woman in a wheelchair.
    “Oh, Tommy,” Mary Lou said, her eyes shining. “That was wonderful!”
    “Play another,” called out a nurse. “‘Jingle Bells’?”
    Everyone started calling out suggestions, but I went up to the woman in the wheelchair. She was so thin I could see all the bones around her neck, and the shape of her skull. Her limp dark hair had faded to gray. She wore a yellow dressing gown with pink roses embroidered around the collar. “What would you like to hear?” I asked her.
    “‘Silent Night,’” she whispered.
    So I played it, and the whole time I was thinking, this is Little Skinny’s mother, the one who is so sick. And yet her eyes still blinked and her lips still moved as she sang along in a voice so quiet I couldn’t hear a word. When I was done, I put the accordion away and went back into the hall, but Little Skinny and his mother were already gone.
The next day at school, Eddie spent recess imitating his mother. “There won’t be any Christmas presents this year!” he yelled in an angry falsetto. “Your father doesn’t have a job and he spent all our savings on the bomb shelter!”
    “At least it makes a good hideout,” I said.
    “Yeah,” said Eddie, “But it still means no presents.”
    “I can’t steal anymore,” I said.
    “What if we didn’t steal them?” Eddie said. “What if we got him”—he gestured to Little Skinny—“to give them to us?”
    “How?” I asked.
    So he told me. It was a good plan, the kind of idea I might have come up with myself. But after seeing Little Skinny's mom in the hospital, just like Mary Lou, well, I kind of felt differently about him now. I shook my head. “No, I don’t think so.”
    “Oh, come on, Tommy,” Eddie said. “It’s Little Skinny. You don’t even like him.”
    No, I didn't. Not really.  But I’d met his mother now and I didn’t know how to explain that to Eddie. So I let myself be convinced to go along with his plan.
    “Little Skinny,” Eddie called out, “you’re the one.”
    “The one what?” Little Skinny asked hesitantly. Two buttons had popped off his too-small shirt, revealing a bit of white belly under his thick wool jacket.
    “The one we wanted to talk to,” I said.
    “Why?” asked Little Skinny.
    “Well, since it is Christmastime,” said Eddie, just as we had rehearsed, “we figured we should be a little nicer to you.”
    “Yeah,” I added. “’Cause we feel bad about the Halloween candy.” I really did feel bad about that.
    “Good,” said Little Skinny. “It was mean.”
    “So we had an idea,” Eddie continued smoothly, holding up an old sock. “We’ll each fill a stocking full of treats for you, and you do the same for us.”
    “Why?” asked Little Skinny.
    “So we all get some treats!” said Eddie.
    “No,” said Little Skinny. “Even if I wanted to buy you guys presents, which I don’t, I don’t have any money.”
    “It doesn’t have to be anything expensive,” Eddie said. “Maybe just bake some cookies or skip buying milk one day and put in some penny candy.”
    “No,” said Little Skinny again.
    “It’s okay, Little Skinny,” I said. Maybe he wouldn’t go along with it. Maybe then I wouldn’t have to decide if I was going to follow through on Eddie’s idea. “If you don’t want—”
    “My name is Sam,” he interrupted.
    “What?” Eddie asked.
    “My name is Sam,” he repeated. “You start calling me that, I’ll do it.”
    “Sure,” I said. “Sam.” Maybe he really was stupid. Why would anyone agree to this plan?
    Little Skinny nodded. “All right. When should I have the stockings ready?”
    Didn’t he know we were going to cheat him? Couldn’t he tell? Or maybe he was like a cowboy riding bravely into an ambush he knew he couldn’t win.
    “The last day of school before the Christmas holiday?” Eddie suggested.
    “Fine,” said Little Skinny.
    “Do you need a stocking?” I asked.
    “I got old socks,” Little Skinny sneered.
    “Wonderful,” Eddie said in his sweetest voice. “Then I’ll just use this sock for you.”
    Little Skinny rolled his eyes and walked away. As he left, I realized Peter and Luke were standing around watching us. “Why didn’t you ask us to join in your little stocking exchange?” Peter asked.
    I couldn’t quite tell if he was angry or jealous.
    “Because they are going to trick him,” said Luke, his bad arm hanging at his side like a weapon.
    “And what if we are?” I snapped[CE132]. “You gonna tell him?”
    Luke stared me straight in the eyes. I’d never noticed, but his eyes were hazel, just like my mother’s, and his nose was as pert as Mary Lou’s. All I’d ever seen before was his arm.
    “No,” Luke said finally. “We mind our own business. Come on, Peter.” They walked away.
    Eddie chattered on, thrilled that his plan had worked, but I felt awful. Little Skinny was the brave one. I was the coward. The one who didn’t dare tell his best friend what he really thought—that his plan was a terrible idea.
