
Burning the Trash, Part 1[CE22]
The angel food cake was waiting on the counter when I woke up, [CE23]looking light and fluffy, coated with an orange glaze. I wasn’t sure how I felt. Glad she’d baked me a replacement, I guess. But it didn’t erase the memory of her throwing the first one against the wall.
    Still, cake was cake. And Dad left for work early and Mom slept late, so when Mary Lou came back from her paper route, she and Pinky and I each gobbled down a slice. With a glass of milk, it was delicious. We were almost done by the time Mom stumbled into the kitchen and Mary Lou handed her a cup of coffee.
    I never knew quite how to react after one of Mom’s fits. Sometimes if you looked at her funny, it would set her off again, so I kept my eyes firmly on my plate. I crushed the last bite of white cake with my fork.
    “The cake was so good, Mom,” Mary Lou said.
    “Thanks.”
    Mom sounded calm. I risked a glance up.
    Her eyes were clear. Her fingers didn’t tremble as she sipped her coffee. She had her pink robe wrapped around her and had even taken the time to pull her hair back into a ponytail. Maybe the throwing was a fluke. A onetime thing. The tension slowly drained out of me like a clogged sink.
    “Did you like the cowboy boots?” Mom asked.
    I held up one foot. I was wearing the boots.
    Mom laughed. “You can’t wear those to school.”
    “I know,” I said. “I’ll change into my shoes after I burn the trash.”
    You see, Mary Lou did the paper route because she was oldest, but my job was to burn our trash in a pit in the backyard. Newspapers were saved for the paper drive, of course, but there were always tin cans and bits of packaging and the brown paper from the dry cleaner. When the fire cooled, we’d pick out the cans and other metal. The homeowners’ association got money for holding scrap metal drives as well.
    I picked up the trash piled by the back door and walked out to the fire pit. There was a slight September wind, so I put a couple of soup cans on top so the paper wouldn’t blow away. Then I threw in the match, just like Dad had shown me. “Always watch to make sure it lights before you turn away,” he’d said. He didn’t have to tell me to keep my eyes on the fire. I loved that moment when the tiny match ignited the paper and it all burst into a big yellow flame.
    That morning when I got dressed, I’d rolled up the Daily Worker and stuck it in my back pocket again. For a moment, I thought about throwing it into the fire like Mary Lou had told me to, so I could see the flames jump again. But I didn’t.
    “Tommy! Hurry up,” called Mary Lou from the kitchen. “It’s almost time for the bus.”
    I ran back to the kitchen. Mom held out the box from the cowboy boots and some more brown paper from the cleaners. “You forgot to burn these.”[CE24]
    I didn’t know what to do. I still had to change my shoes. No way the nuns would let me come to school in cowboy boots. But if I said no, it might set Mom off and she’d start yelling again. And if I said yes, I’d miss the bus. And missing the bus would . . . 
    “I’ll do it,” said Mary Lou, reading my mind and taking the paper and the box [CE25]from Mom.
    “Thanks,” I said.
    She shrugged. “Just get your shoes on.”
    I tucked the copy of the Daily Worker into my school satchel and sat down to pull off my boots. At the time the moment [CE26]didn’t seem so special, watching Mary Lou walk out to the fire pit, a pile of papers[CE27][CE28] in her arms. But afterward, I kept picturing it again and again—the sun shining on her brown hair, which she had brushed and combed into two neat braids. Her navy-blue wool pleated skirt, white blouse and matching sweater. Her polished penny loafers leaving footprints in the wet grass. But the main thing I remember was how lightly she walked, with a little skip in her gait. I realized Mary Lou actually liked burning the trash. She’d done it until last year, when she’d gotten the paper route. She liked scrunching the paper into balls so it wouldn’t blow away, lighting the match and throwing it, and the way the fire would lick across the paper, slowly at first, then bursting all at once, like a tiger lily opening in the morning sun.
    She threw the match in just like Dad had shown us, and watched the flame catch to make sure no burning paper blew away.
    “Mary Lou!” I called. “Thanks again!”
    She turned then, suddenly, to say something mean and teasing to me. I still wonder what it was going to be. You owe me one, cowboy! Or Shut up, Tommy! Or even simply, You’re welcome. [CE29]But I never found out, because as she turned, her pleated skirt flew out over the pit.
    At first I thought it was just a glare—that the sun was shining on her again, making her glow orange. But then I heard the screams.
