0
At the Hospital
It was the Sunday after New Year’s and I was sitting in the waiting room at the hospital again, coloring with Pinky. Mom was upstairs with Mary Lou. I hadn’t seen my sister since the argument about the pain pills. I wasn’t sure what I would say when I did.
    The stairway door opened and Little Skinny slipped out. As he walked toward the main door, he passed Pinky and me in the waiting room.
    “Hey, Little Skinny!” I called.
    He glanced at me, then kept walking.
    I ran after him, catching up with him just as he was pushing open the door. “Little Skinny!” I said. “I wanted to talk to you.”
    “My name is Sam,” he said. [CE142]
    I felt awful then. I'd forgotten I'd promised to call him by his name. 
    “And I don’t want to talk to you.” Little Skinny crossed his arms.
    “Okay, okay,” I said. “I get it.”
    He glared at me.
    “You were so mean!” he said.
    After everything that had happened over Christmas, I had almost pushed the coal stockings out of my mind. Add that to my list of things I wished I could forget. I shrugged. “It was just a joke.”
    “It was not a joke,” he said. “It was horrible!” Little Skinny turned bright red as he got more and more worked up. “You’re a different person at the store, Tommy. I don’t know how you can be so cruel at school.”
    “Did you even look in the stocking I made?” I asked. “There was an orange and a nickel and a tin soldier.”
    “No,” he said. “It was filled with coal.”
    “I only put a couple of pieces on top so Eddie wouldn’t know.”
    “So Eddie wouldn’t know what?” he asked. “That you were being nice to me? That sometimes you act like you’re my friend, and then you’re horrible again?”
    “I—I—” I didn’t know what to say. “It was Eddie’s idea,” I finished lamely.
    “It doesn’t matter whose idea it was! It was really mean.”
    It was mean. I knew that.
    “It’s not fair, Tommy,” Little Skinny went on. “Just ’cause you’re good-looking and clever and know how to charm people doesn’t mean you get to stomp on the rest of us. You’re lucky and you don’t even appreciate it!”
    “Oh, so you think my life is so perfect, huh?” We were practically yelling now.
    “It’s looking pretty good from where I sit.”
    “You need to get your eyes examined. My sister is half burned up!” I was screaming now. “She almost died!”
    “But she didn’t,” Little Skinny screamed back. “And my mom’s going to!”[SB143]
    Little Skinny and I stood in the doorway, glaring at each other. In the waiting room, Pinky colored like nothing was wrong. The nurse at the reception desk stared, wide-eyed, not even pretending she wasn’t listening.
    The worst part was, Little Skinny had a point. Mary Lou was getting better. And his mom wasn't. “I’m sorry,” I said. “I’m so sorry. About your mom and everything else.”
    He rubbed his eyes and we both pretended not to notice he was crying. “We’re going to have to leave, you know. My dad said we’re closing up the store the last week in January and going to live with his cousin in Chicago.”
    That was my fault too. But at least he didn’t say it.
“Mom will have to stay here," Little Skinny went on. "She's been in the hospital since August. I don't think she's ever coming out."     
    “That’s not fair,” I said.
    “No,” he agreed. “It isn’t.”
    “Really,” I said softly. “I’m sorry.”
    Little Skinny said nothing. But he came back to the waiting room and sat down on the brown couch. “I’m not scared of you anymore. With Mom dying, you just don’t seem that important.”
    I smiled and sat down next to him. “How was your Christmas?”
    Little Skinny snorted.
    “That good, huh?”
    We both giggled a bit, though I saw a tear run down his scar.
    “Yeah,” I said. “Mine was about the same.”
    He didn’t say a word. We sat in silence for a while, until Pinky said she had to go potty and Little Skinny stood up and said, “I’ll take her.” As they walked off, I tried to imagine what it would be like to be an only child like Little Skinny. At least I had Pinky and Susie to take care of and Mary Lou to give me advice. I had a dog to lick my face when I was sad and Mrs. Glazov to play accordion with me.
    I wasn't sure I deserved it. I'd been mean to Luke and Peter on the bus, and awful to Little Skinny.  I'd destroyed Mr. McKenzie's reputation, sworn I'd clear his name and then gotten caught up in my own problems. I didn't keep my word. I wasn't a nice friend.
    It was a new year and I wanted to change.
