4
the Seamstress
Sunday after church I told Mrs. Glazov I wasn’t feeling well and went to the movies. It was mid-January and I hadn’t been to the Tivoli since I’d started giving her reading lessons. Usually I went with Eddie, but he still wasn’t talking to me. I wanted to lose myself in a good film and forget all my problems for a little while.
    The movie that day was called Red Planet Mars. It was about two American scientists, a husband and a wife, who started receiving radio messages from Mars. “The whole world is scared,” said the wife. “Why shouldn’t I be?”
She was talking about the Soviets who may—or may not—have been faking the radio messages in an attempt to cause chaos in the American economy. But I could relate. I was scared too. What if someone found out about my dad? Would someone throw a rock through our front window? Draw a hammer and sickle on our car? Would Dad lose his job at Western Electric? My     dad wasn’t going to take over the world or redistribute our property or even stop going to church. He wasn't a bad person. Sure, he sometimes made me mad, but I loved him. Oh, why had he gone to that stupid meeting?! 
    “We’ve lived on the edge of a volcano all our lives,” the scientist in the movie continued. “One day it has to boil over.”[CE146]
    She could have been describing my life. Sometimes, I felt like a big explosion was coming, but no one would believe me and I had no way to stop it. I left the theater more exhausted than when I had arrived.
    My thoughts were still running in circles on Monday morning when I woke up. It was snowing, a heavy, wet snow that would make delivering the papers even harder, but I didn’t care. It matched my mood.
    I gobbled down my breakfast as Boots paced the kitchen, impatient to get outside and run. When it was time to go, I realized I’d left my snow boots outside on the back porch. Melting snow had run off the roof and now my boots were sopping wet. Great.
    I ran back to my room to pull on my cowboy boots instead. There was something sharp in one of them. It was the silver sheriff’s star from Mary Lou. I put it in my pocket.
    Outside, it was still snowing. I placed a big tarp over the papers on the sled, but I knew some of them were still going to get wet. I hoped no one would complain.
    The streets were deserted. This was a morning for curling up in bed or drinking a cup of hot chocolate and watching the snow fall from the kitchen window. The only sign of life was at Ma and Pa’s house. They were up early, as usual, and Ma invited me in for some cocoa, but I said, “No, thank you.” I didn’t want to talk to anyone today. I felt so ashamed. As if Son of Communist was branded on my forehead.
    Soon as Boots and I got back on the road, we spotted a rooster there, shivering, like he’d gotten out of his coop and couldn’t find his way home. Great. Now I’d have to go back to tell Ma and Pa and—
    By my side, Boots growled.
    “No,” I yelled, but it was too late.
    Boots tore off after the rooster. The bird dashed down the road, crowing like it was already sunrise. I ran after them both. If Boots killed that bird, I’d have to pay Ma and Pa back. ’Course it was probably going to die anyway because of the cold. It was snowing even harder now, and my hat fell off in the wind. I stopped to pick it up and didn’t even notice when a car turned the corner and headed straight for me.
    At the last minute it honked. I glanced up, and jumped out of the way. There was a loud thump as I fell into the snowbank on the side of the road.
    The car kept going, the driver not even stopping to see if I was hurt. I’d pulled the sled over when I jumped and the papers were scattered all over the road. I was sore and bruised, but nothing hurt too badly. The papers were ruined. By the time I gathered them all up, I’d probably be late for school. I was cursing my luck when I heard a small whimper.
    There was a small, hairy lump lying in the middle of the road.
    Boots! The car had hit him, not the sled or me. That was the thump I’d heard. The stupid rooster was still running around in circles, like he’d had his head cut off.
    “Boots,” I called. “Are you okay?”
    He tried to pick up his head but couldn’t. His tail gave the tiniest flicker of a wag.
    I went closer. There was a huge red gash from one end of his belly to the other.
    He whimpered again.
    I was pretty sure I could see his guts hanging out.
    “It’s going to be okay,” I said, knowing I was lying. I pulled the sled upright and threw the rest of the papers off, leaving just one layer of dry ones. Then I ran back to Boots and ever so carefully picked him up and laid him gently on the sled.
    “It’s okay, boy,” I said again.
    He didn’t even try to wag his tail this time. I pulled the tarp over him and tried to figure out what to do. I couldn’t go home. With all the medical bills, I knew Mom and Dad had no money for a vet. Think, Tommy, think, I said to myself. Boots needed stitches. I knew how to sew a button on, or hem a pant leg if it came undone, but a dog? My dog? There was no way. Boots was going to die and . . . 
    Then I remembered Mrs. Scully. She was a seamstress. Surely she’d be able to help.
    I didn’t allow myself to think about it anymore, just ran to her house pulling the sled behind me as gently as possible. It had almost stopped snowing by the time I reached her place. I scooped Boots up in my arms and carried him up the porch steps. He was trembling as I banged on the door.
    It seemed like forever before Mrs. Scully came to the door in her bathrobe. Her hair was a mess and there wasn’t a drop of makeup on her face. She looked young and pretty and a little scared.
    “Tommy,” she cried. “What’s wrong?”
    “My dog,” was all I could choke out. 
    She touched Boots gently and when she took her hand away there was blood on her fingers. "What happened?" 
    “He got hit by a car!” I said. “There’s a big gash all down his stomach. I thought—I thought—” I started to cry great big tears that rolled down my cheeks.
    Mrs. Scully only nodded. “Bring him inside and we’ll see what we can do.” I expected her to start crying too, but she didn’t. Her eyes were hard and determined, like Grace Kelly’s in High Noon when she decided to get off that train and start fighting back. 
    I followed her into the house. There was a clean towel on the kitchen table. She pointed to it. “Put him there. I'll be right back.” I laid Boots down on the towel. He was still breathing. Barely.
    Mrs. Scully strode back into the kitchen, her sewing basket in one hand, a bottle of pills in the other.
    “Sleeping pills,” she said, pressing the bottle into my hand. “Give him half of one. Too many pills will kill a dog faster than a gash in the side.”
    The pills spilled out all over the counter as I pulled off the lid. I grabbed a knife and cut. There was a jar of peanut butter nearby. I scooped out a spoonful and buried the pill in it.
    Boots was practically unconscious anyway, but he opened his eyes when I said his name. “I got a treat for you, boy,” I said, and stuck the peanut butter on his tongue.
    Automatically, he swallowed it. And his eyes closed again.
    “Don’t you worry,” said Mrs. Scully, as she washed her hands. “I grew up on a farm. I’ve sewn up pigs and cows and . . .” She turned to look at me. “I can’t make any promises, but Tommy, I swear I will do my best to save your dog.”
    She took a big, curved needle from her kit. My knees felt weak, and I think I wobbled on my feet. 
    “Get out of here,” said Mrs. Scully, threading the needle.
    I nodded. “I got to do the rest of the route.”
    “Good,” she said. “Don’t think about it. Just come back in the afternoon and we’ll see how we’re doing then.”
