7
the Rope
Dad didn’t know exactly what had happened, just that Mom had been admitted. Ma and Pa decided they would drive me to the hospital to meet Dad. Mrs. Glazov would stay home with my sisters. I nodded and followed Pa to the car, obedient as a lassoed calf.
    We got stuck at the railroad crossing, just like on that other ride, the one I had taken with Mom and Mary Lou. I was cold, even though I was still wearing Pa’s coat. Was Mom hurt bad, as bad as Mary Lou? Pa chattered on and on as he drove.
    “From what you say, Tommy, I believe your mother is suffering from melancholia. A damping of spirits, brought on by a number of different factors. She probably always had an innate tendency to it, but it can be greatly exacerbated by major [CE160]life events such as death, birth, injury, all of which your family has experienced in the past year.
    “I studied this in Vienna, before the war. I never missed the Saturday-evening lectures by Dr. Sigmund Freud [CE161]at the university. There are many techniques to be used in such a case: dream analysis, hypnosis . . .”
    He continued on and on, but I found it hard to listen. If Mom died, she couldn't whip me anymore. Maybe then I could breathe in my own house. But the fact that I was even thinking that made me feel awful. I loved my mom! Didn't I? Sometimes she was nice. And what would Pinky and Susie do without her? They were still little, and little kids need their mom. 
    The car was old and the shocks were bad. Every time we went over a bump, I remembered Mary Lou moaning in pain. Ma had insisted on sitting in the back with me. She reached over and held my hand. I squeezed it back and held on tight, as my thoughts went round and round in the darkness.
When we arrived Dad and Dr. Stanton were sitting in the waiting room, talking in low voices. Dad was sitting stiffly, as if he’d been riding a horse all day, and hadn’t quite remembered he was out of the saddle. Dr. Stanton looked tired too. He ran his hand though his salt-and-pepper.
    Dad stood up as we entered. “Tommy!” He ran over and gave me a hug. I wasn’t sure when was the last time he’d looked that happy to see me. It made me glad, and then I felt awful. Awful to feel happy that now my mother was in the hospital too.
    “Is she . . . is Mom going to be okay?” I asked.
    Dad nodded. “She’s got some bruises and bumps and they’re going to keep her in the hospital overnight, but yeah, she’s fine. Physically, at least.”
    I was so relieved my legs went rubbery and numb and I had to sit down on the couch.
    “I spoke to the physician who treated her,” Dr. Stanton said. “I'm not sure what to recommend once she's released. We could send her to a sanatorium, but . . .”
    "A sanatorium?" Dad asked.
    I wasn't exactly sure what that was, but the look on Dad's face make me think it wasn't good.
    "Perhaps," Dr. Stanton said gently.
    "You've been our family doctor a long time." Dad sounded defeated. "We'll do what you think best."
    “If I may,” interrupted Pa, “perhaps I can offer another solution. I am a doctor of psychiatry, trained with Freud, Adler and Jung before the war, even published a couple of articles about melancholia, though that’s years ago now. I would be happy to try treating her at my home.”
    “At your home?” Dad asked.
    “Yes,” Ma continued. “We’d be more than happy to have Mrs. Wilson stay with us for a few weeks. It’s no imposition. The rest would do her good as much as anything else.”
    Dad looked confused. He glanced at Dr. Stanton.
    “I don’t really believe in the talking cure,” Dr. Stanton said. Then he shrugged. “But I guess you could try it, rather than immediately sending her away."
    "I don't know," Dad said. "I just don't know what to do." He buried his face in his hands. Dr. Stanton put a hand on his back.
    "It's up to you, Robert," Dr. Stanton said kindly.
    Dad took a deep breath. "We’ll manage all right with her at home. I’ll do more and Tommy . . .”
    I couldn’t believe it. Dad was turning them both down. I didn’t think I had it in me to do any more. There was already the paper route and the dishes and the cleaning and taking care of Pinky and Susie, all the while tiptoeing on eggshells around Mom. “No, Dad,” I interrupted. “I’m sorry. But we just can’t handle Mom by ourselves anymore.”
    Dad sat down next to me on that ugly brown couch, the one I’d sat on so many times with Pinky, and he started to cry. It was even worse than when Mr. McKenzie had cried because this was my father. Dads weren’t supposed to cry. I wanted to run away, but the sheriff’s star was still pinned to my shirt.  I had to make him understand.
    “Dad,” I said. “Do you remember the time the Lone Ranger was stuck in the mine, all alone, and he tried everything but couldn’t find a way out? And then Tonto came and lowered a rope to him?”
    “Yes,” my dad choked out. “We listened to that episode together. Why?”
    “Please,” I said. “Let them be our Tonto. ’Cause we really, really need a rope.”
    He looked up at me then, the tears moistening the crevices in his cheeks like a desert canyon after a hard rain. “Okay,” he said.
    "So what would you like to do?" asked Dr. Stanton. "The sanatorium. Or the talking cure."
    "The talking cure, I guess," Dad said. "I'm not ready to send Catherine away."
    Pa looked thrilled. I remembered how he’d never liked being a chicken farmer. He had been a doctor and now he could be one again.
    The grown-ups huddled together to work out the details. I slipped away and ran up the stairs to tell Mary Lou the news. But my sister wasn’t in her bed. I glanced around and saw her halfway down the hall. She was walking! I mean, she was holding on to the railing on the side of the wall for dear life, but she was walking.
    “Mary Lou!” I cried.
    She turned, smiled and nearly fell.
    I rushed to grab her arm.
    We grinned at each other for a moment.
    “Did you hear about Mom?” I asked.
    Her grin disappeared. “Yeah. Are they going to send her away?" 
    "No," I said. "She's going to stay with Ma and Pa."
    "The Kopecky's?" Mary Lou asked, surprised.
    I nodded. "He's a doctor."
    "Oh, I didn't know."
    "Do you know where Mom's room is?"
    Mary Lou nodded this time. "I was going to see her. The elevator is down the hall.”
    I took her hand and we walked together, taking tiny steps. But unlike at Christmas, she didn’t wince in pain with each one. I felt dizzy with all that had happened that day. In the elevator I accidentally leaned against my sister, and for a moment, it seemed like she was holding me up.
    We got off the elevator and took a couple more steps. Mary Lou stopped. “Here we are,” she said.
    We looked at each other, and pushed the door open. Mary Lou and I, still holding hands, crept inside.
It was just like when I'd first seen Mary Lou. Mom was turned away, facing the wall, her long black hair in a tangle on the pillow.     She was asleep, her breathing slow and gentle. She had one black eye and a bandage over a huge lump on her forehead. For the first time ever I noticed her nose was shaped just like mine, with a little ski jump at the end.
    I hated her. And I loved her. And at that moment, I wasn’t sure which one was stronger. All I knew was that I was glad to see her breathing, her chest going up and down. Glad to see she was alive.
    Mary Lou ran her fingers through Mom’s matted hair. “I’ll have to bring my brush,” she whispered. “She brushed mine. I don’t remember much about those first few weeks in the hospital, but I remember her brushing my hair.”
    We waited a long time, but her breathing remained slow and steady. Finally, Mary Lou and I went back to her room.
    “You’re walking pretty well,” I said.
    “Yeah.” Mary Lou smiled. “I guess I am.”
Dad had taken a taxi from work, so Ma and Pa drove us home. No one spoke in the car. When we got to our neighborhood, I asked them to drop me off at Mrs. Scully’s. “Why?” Dad asked.
    “Long story," I said. "Maybe Pa could fill you in?"
    Pa nodded.
    As I walked up Mrs. Scully’s steps, my heart was beating like I’d been running up a hill. I knocked, soft and hesitant. Mrs. Scully didn’t answer.
    My stomach dropped. Boots had died during the day while I’d been at the hospital. I knew it. My body went numb all over, like I’d suddenly turned into a giant ice cube and . . . 
    A dog barked.
    It sounded like it was coming from inside the house. I opened up the screen door and went inside.
    And there, on the kitchen floor, running around like he didn’t have an eight-inch gash in his tummy, was Boots. He was drinking water from a bowl, but when he saw me he stopped and ran over to greet me. I knelt down and let him lick my face.
    “That dog is a Sherman tank[CE163],” said Mrs. Scully, walking into the room. “He woke up this afternoon when I was [CE164]frying sausages[CE165] for dinner and started begging like nothing had happened.”
    Boots kept licking my face and wiggling his tail. His breath smelled like sausages.
    “Don’t give him anything else to eat.” She sighed. “He already got three pieces of sausage out of me. He needs to take it easy until he heals.”
    I swallowed. My mouth was dry and my hands were shaking. I’d managed to hold it together all day, with my mom and seeing Mary Lou, but now that I knew Boots was okay, I was falling apart. “Thank you.”
    “Oh, Tommy,” said Mrs. Scully, sitting down heavily in the kitchen chair. “I’m so happy myself.”
Boots sat in my arms all the way home, his nose up in the air, sniffing away. I carried him inside. Mrs. Glazov was at the stove making dinner. “Pa told us,” she said. “How is dog?”
    “He’s all right,” I answered.
    Mrs. Glazov wiped her hands on the flowered apron and came over to examine him. “Such even stitches.” She nodded in approval. “I send mending to Mrs. Scully from now on.”
    I smiled at her. She looked different. It took me a minute to realize why. Her white hair had been combed and pulled back into a neat bun. Even her dress seemed a little less faded than normal. Like Pa, she seemed not at all put out by us needing her help. She seemed happy.
    “Dinner ready!” Mrs. Glazov called. Susie gurgled in her high chair. Pinky ran into the kitchen.
    “I’m not hungry,” Dad said from the kitchen doorway.
    “Sit,” Mrs. Glazov ordered.
    “Better do what she says,” I said. “She can be very bossy.”
    So Dad sat, and when he saw Boots, he smiled. “I’m glad he’s okay, Tommy,” he said with a wide grin.
    “Yeah,” I said. “Me too.”
It was a good evening. Mrs. Glazov had made a Russian noodle dish, not exactly like Busia’s perogies, but almost as tasty in a different way. Pinky chattered away happily, like she hadn’t done in months. After dinner, Mrs. Glazov gave Pinky a bath and put Susie to bed. Dad and I did the dishes. When Mrs. Glazov came out of the nursery, she was smiling. “Beautiful baby,” she said. “Real doll.”     She put her hands on her hips. “Good job on dishes. I come back and help again tomorrow.”
    My dad shook his head. “You’ve already done so much.”
    “Please,” she said. “Make me feel useful. Let me come. I come every day if you want. No vegetables to plant in winter.”
    “But we don’t have any money to pay you. We can’t even pay the medical bills for Mary Lou.”
    “Tommy taught me to read,” said Mrs. Glazov, without looking at me. “Tommy plays accordion with me,” she continued, “and Tommy invited me to Thanksgiving. Think it’s time I do something for you.”
    Dad looked at me as if he were seeing me for the first time in ages.
    “Tommy good boy,” Mrs. Glazov said.
    “Yeah,” my dad agreed. “He’s pretty amazing.”
    As I lay in bed that night, I kept hearing my dad’s words again and again. And I couldn’t stop smiling.
