0
Each According to His Needs
The last Sunday in January, Dad and I drove to the hospital. It was early evening and snowing lightly, the flakes big and almost blue in the moonlight. The windshield wipers swished back and forth. All week I’d been haunted by memories of Mom: standing in her white nightgown in the Kopeckys’ hallway; holding the belt as it flew through the air and hit Pinky; throwing the perogies on my birthday.
    “Dad?” I asked.
    “Hmm?”
    “Why didn’t you ever do anything?”
    “About what?”
    “About Mom.”
    Dad glanced over at me. The streetlights reflected off the snow, making my dad’s face glow like a jack-o’-lantern. “Don’t worry, Tommy,” he said. “When Mom comes home, I’m sure things will be much better.”
    He'd ignored my question. Again. It made me angry. “You really think everything will be fine?” I scoffed. “She’ll just stay at Pa and Ma’s for a few weeks and they’ll fix her up, good as new!”
    “Tommy, your mother is . . .” Dad stopped, unable to find the right way to describe her.
    “Why didn’t you ever say anything?”
    “I don’t know,” Dad said. “I don’t know.”
    Swish, swash, swish, swash. The wipers droned on. The snow fell, quiet and peaceful. Dad was silent so long, I didn’t think he was going to answer. Then he said, “My parents spanked me. Spare the rod, spoil the child. I wanted to believe that was all it was.”
    “She knocked over the Christmas tree!”
    “Women act strange when they’ve had a baby and—”
    “Dad!”
    “I know,” he said, so quiet it was almost a whisper.
    “We needed you to do something!”
    “I’m sorry,” he said. “I didn’t know what to do.”
    I’d never heard him apologize to me before. It made me feel like he was actually listening to what I had to say. And knowing that my dad sometimes made mistakes was scary and terrifying and kind of wonderful all at the same time. Maybe the reason he hadn’t stopped my mom from beating me wasn’t because he didn’t care, but because he didn’t know what to do. I understood that. I’d felt that way a million times.
    “What about Mr. McKenzie and the paper?” I asked.
    “Yeah,” Dad said. “Honestly, I should have done something.”
    He looked so miserable, his eyes drooping, his shoulders slumped, that I finally asked, “Why did you go to those meetings anyway?”
    “I don’t know,” he said. He was silent for a long time, but at last he went on. “After the First World War many people thought communism was an idea worth talking about, one that might have prevented much of the suffering of the Great Depression. Part of the reason I got a good job in the factory at Western Electric, one that paid enough to support you and your mother and your sisters, is because the unions got ideas from Karl Marx. Ideas about working-class people gaining power and influence. It doesn’t seem right to just forget about all those ideas now that I’m a manager.
    “Karl Marx’s original view of communism was a utopian society where everyone would share everything, and everyone would have what they needed. ‘From each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs[CE178].’
    “I liked the idea that if someone was in need, someone else would volunteer to help. It remind me of why I moved to Downers Grove. I hoped a small town would be a place where we would all . . . take care of one another.”
    Dad shook his head.
    “But when Stalin came to power in the Soviet Union, he did horrific things in the name of communism. Millions of people were executed or died from disease and starvation when they were sent to Siberia or forced-labor camps. The communists arrested people who spoke out against them, took over governments of other countries in Eastern Europe and outlawed religion. Stalin’s version of communism was nothing like the utopian ideals that we discussed in the meetings I attended.
    “And now McCarthy has embarked on this witch hunt, saying anyone who ever thought about a different idea, anyone who ever considered another viewpoint, is a traitor to our country.”
    Dad shook his head again. “No, Tommy. I’m no communist. But I do believe the great thing about the United States is that we are free to have whatever ideas we want, even the bad ones[CE179]. At least—we were until McCarthy came along.”
    My head was spinning, all the old things I'd believed about my dad melting away like the snowflakes on the warm windshield. For the first time, I could really picture my father as a young man, like me, learning new things, meeting new people, taking risks, making mistakes.[CE180]
    We pulled into the hospital parking lot. “Come on, Tommy,” he said. “Let’s go see Mary Lou.”
    Dad went off to talk with the doctors, and Mary Lou and I practiced walking up and down the hallway. But it had only been five minutes when Mary Lou said, “All right, Tommy. Spill the beans.”
    “What?”
    “I can tell something is wrong. You might as well admit it.” She gripped my arm. Her fingers were cold as icicles. “Did Sister Ann say something? Am I not working hard enough? Am I not going to graduate on time? Please, Tommy, just tell me, I want to know!”
    “No,” I said. “It’s nothing like that.”
    “Then what?”
    I sighed. I’d never told her what I’d done to Mr. McKenzie[SB181]. “It’s kind of a long story.”
    Mary Lou snorted, most unladylike. “Well, I got plenty of time.”
    So we sat down in her room and I started talking. About planting the paper in Mr. McKenzie’s store. About him losing the business. And finally, about Dad being the communist.
    When I’d finished telling her everything, even what Dad had said to me in the car, she leaned over and gave me a hug. “Oh, Tommy!”
    “Aren’t you going to say I told you so?” I asked.
    She shook her head. “No. It sounds like you’ve suffered enough. That’s a lot to deal with all by yourself.”
    I shrugged. “I didn’t want to burden you.”
    “Still,” she said, “I wish you had told me before.”
    “Told you what?” Dad asked, walking into the room.
    “About your college activities, Comrade Dad,” Mary Lou teased.
    But Dad did not laugh. All the blood drained from his face as he shut Mary Lou’s door. When he turned back toward us, he looked as serious as a skeleton. “Did you tell her?” Dad asked me.
    “Yeah.”
    “Tommy!”
    “It’s just Mary Lou!” I didn’t see what the big deal was.
    “I told you not to tell anyone!”
    “I’m not going to tell, Dad!” Mary Lou sounded offended.
    “The more people who know, the greater the chance of it coming out. The greater the chance of something awful happening.”
    “But you told Mr. McKenzie,” I pointed out.
    “We owed him. And it was probably a mistake.”
    “Dad, we know how to keep a secret,” Mary Lou said softly.
    "I hope you do," he said angrily, "because this isn't a game. If anyone gets a whiff of a rumor that I might be a communist, I could lose my job at the plant. And then who would . . . who would . . ."
    Dad stopped talking and sat down on the edge of the bed. He covered his face with his hands and I was afraid he was going to start crying again, like he had when Mom had been hurt. I knew what he was going to say. If he got fired, who would earn money for the family? Who would pay the hospital bills?
    Mary Lou was as white as the hospital sheets on her bed. 
    "I'm sorry, Dad."
    Dad took a deep breath and stood up. There might have been tears in his eyes, but I didn't want to look to closely. “Come on, Tommy. We need to go.” 
    I jumped up.
    “And both of you, not a word!”
    “We promise,” Mary Lou and I said at the same time.
    Dad and I walked a few paces down the hall in silence, when one of the nurses stopped me. “Hey, it’s the famous accordion player,” she said, and patted me on the shoulder. “You were great!”
    “I’m not that good.” I blushed.
    “Yeah, you were.” She added, “I’d pay money to hear you play.” She winked at me and walked on.
    We were almost out the door, when a man in a suit ran up to us. "Mr. Wilson," he said, "may I speak to you for a moment?"
    They went into a little office and left me outside, but I could hear snippets through the closed door. Payment late. Again. Dad apologizing, his voice low and gravelly. Trying to be understanding, but...
I stepped away, not wanting to listen any more.     In the car, I thought about the man in the suit and the nurse, and about what dad had said about people helping one another. My thoughts slowly packed together like a snowball. Mrs. Glazov was planning a concert. She wanted me to be in it. What if we made it a concert to raise money for Mary Lou's medical bills?
    It had started to snow again and that reminded me of something else. “Hey Dad,” I said. “Remember that movie we saw at the Tivoli last year? The Christmas one with Jimmy Stewart.”
    “Yeah,” Dad said. “It’s a Wonderful Life[CE182].”
    “That’s it,” I said. “I liked the end. When the town just gives him all the money to replace the bank deposit he lost.”
    “Yeah, me too,” Dad said absently.
    Surely it wouldn’t be asking for charity [SB183]if we offered people a concert in return. And what was so bad about accepting charity anyway? 
    Maybe I could make Dad’s vision of Downers Grove come true after all.
