5
the Flyers
The third Saturday in March after my paper route, I stopped by Sam’s to pick up the flyers. There were lots of changes to the store already. (The insurance money had been enough to pay the back rent and then some.) The shelves had been ripped out and a black-and-white tile floor was being put in. Mr. McKenzie was busy showing a workman where to put the soda counter. “Sam’s upstairs,” he called to me. “Go on up!”
    Sam was in the living room, with piles of paper surrounding him. His hands were covered with purple ink and the whole room smelled like chemicals. “Don’t touch anything!” he said. “I’ve got everything ready to go.” Methodically, he stacked the flyers and placed them into a large blue bag. He handed the bag to me.
    “Thanks,” I said.
    “Tommy?”
    I looked at him.
    “Do you need help delivering the flyers?”
    “Nah,” I said. "I asked Eddie to help."
    “Why didn’t you ask me?”
    “You already did the printing,” I said. “You don’t want to get up at four a.m.”
    “And Eddie doesn’t like me,” he said.
    “Yeah,” I added. “That too.”
    He snorted. “Of course, I didn’t like you either, at first.”
    “The feeling was mutual.”
    And we both smiled.
Sunday morning my alarm went off at four o’clock. I pulled on my clothes and cowboy boots and grabbed Sam’s bag.
    It was only thirty minutes earlier than normal, but the darkness felt thick and heavy. As I sat on my front porch, folding and placing a flyer in each newspaper, my heart felt heavy too. Eddie hadn’t shown up. No one ever told you that doing the right thing would be so hard. Or feel so lonely. Even Boots was still inside, asleep on my pillow. He needed his rest and I didn’t have the heart to wake him. Mechanically, I kept folding.
    “Tommy?”
    I whirled around. Standing in the shadows was Sam. 
    “What are you doing here?”
    “Helping, of course,” said Sam. 
    “Thanks.” I shoved a pile of flyers at him. Unfortunately, it had rained the night before. Spring was coming soon, which was nice, except that the papers fell right into a puddle[CE202].
    “Don’t worry,” Sam said. “I brought extras.”
    “Really,” I said. “You didn’t need to come.”
    “Yeah, well.” He shrugged. “To you, I’m sure it doesn’t feel like much. But to me, sneaking out of the house in the early morning feels like an exciting adventure!” Sam grinned and for the first time since his mom had died a month and a half before, the smile reached all the way to his eyes.
    “Ah,” I said, remembering his words from the day he’d fallen in the lake. “You always wanted to steal some yo-yos.”
    “Don’t do it,” Eddie called out. He was approaching from the other direction. “It leads to getting up at four a.m.”
    He’d come after all. Maybe we really were friends again. “Good to see you,” I said.
    “Yeah, well . . . ,” Eddie mumbled.
    “Hello, Eddie,” said Sam.
    Eddie looked at him, directly at his scar. Sam stood still without flinching.
    “Hello . . . Sam,” he said.
    Sam smiled. We all sat down and started folding and stuffing. We didn’t really talk—it was too early and I didn’t want to wake my family, but it was still nice. Almost like a party. I used to think being a cowboy meant dividing the world up into good guys and bad guys. Eddie and I were a posse, the rest of them were Indians. But maybe that wasn’t really how it worked. Maybe sometimes the cowboys and Indians could be friends.
    “Give me some more,” Eddie said.
    Sam passed them over, like a peace pipe, and before I knew it, we were done. I was ready to go at my normal time. “Well, um, thanks,” I said.
    They both nodded and went home. And I got on my bike to ride off into the sunrise.
That afternoon, I stopped by home to pick up some of Dad’s tools and then went over to Ma and Pa’s to fix their chicken-coop door. I was nervous about maybe seeing Mom again, but cowboys always keep their promises. I snuck around back without even letting anyone know I was there and started working.
    It felt good to concentrate on something I knew I could fix. Felt good to pry out the broken door, and frame up a new one. I was almost done when I heard footsteps behind me. I caught a whiff of perfume. I’d bought Mom a bottle of perfume last year on her birthday, right before Busia had died. She’d burst into tears when she’d opened it. Apparently, she’d wanted the yellow bottle and I’d gotten the green one.
    “You’ve done a great job,” Mom said.
    I shrugged.
    “We got your flyer,” she went on.
    I shrugged again.
    “At first I was upset,” she admitted. “I don’t accept charity! I don’t want everyone to know we’re having money troubles.”
    I still didn’t say anything. I wasn’t doing the concert for her.
    She took a deep breath. “But then I remembered what Pa is always telling me. I don’t have to do everything alone. I don’t have to give in to the dark moods when they come. I can wait until they pass. Or if they don’t pass, I’m supposed to ask for help. I will ask for help.”
    I concentrated intently on pounding the nail straight into the door frame. “Mary Lou said charity is just another word for help.”
    “I think she’s right,” said Mom. “Tommy—”
    “You don’t have to say anything else,” I said, cutting her off. We weren’t arguing. She’d been nice. I didn’t want to push our luck.
    “I don’t know if I can change,” Mom went on. “But I want to try."
    She walked back into the house. I’d never even turned to look at her. But as I packed the tools away, I noticed I was crying.[SB203]
