0
Mary Lou’s Welcome-Home Dinner
It was early May, the day before Mothers' Day, and Mary Lou was finally coming home. She’d been in the hospital almost eight months[CE233]. Mom and Dad had gone to pick her up. While I was waiting, I ran my hands over the white picket fence around our front yard. The top edge went up and down in little waves. One summer when we were painting it, I had asked my father about it. “Wouldn’t it have been easier to make all the slats the same length?”
    “Easier, yes,” Dad had said. “But life isn’t like that. There are good times and bad. Ups and downs.” He painted quietly for a moment, and then added, almost to himself, “Sometimes I need that reminder.” I hadn’t understood what he’d meant at the time, but I kind of did now.
    “Tommy!” Pinky ran out the front door, stumbling on the three steps. She was almost five, and looked more like a little girl than a baby. “Mrs. Glazov’s making chicken and potato dumplings for dinner.”
    Mary Lou was going to love them. I sat down next to my little sister on the front stoop.
    “Mary Lou will braid my hair?” she asked.
    “She will,” I said.
    “And play dolls?”
    “I bet she will if you ask her.”
    Pinky sighed. “She sounds nice.”
    “Don’t you remember her?” I asked. “She was home at Christmas.”
    “’Course I do,” Pinky said. “But sometimes I forget.” I realized that Pinky hadn’t been allowed to see Mary Lou in the hospital at all. The visit at Christmas had been awful, and except for the concert, she hadn’t seen Mary Lou at all for four months. That was a long time for a little kid.
    “Well, you’ll like her,” I said, giving Pinky a hug “I’m sure about that.”
    Two more cars drove past, and then another, and then the next car turned into our driveway. Mary Lou was waving a mile a minute from the backseat. We ran to the car and pulled the door open.
    Mary Lou smiled up at me. She’d gotten her hair cut since I’d last seen her, a couple of days before. Her brown hair was short now, in waves, and it made her look more grown-up. “Give me a hand, Tommy?”
    “Sure, sis.” I took her fingers in mine and carefully pulled her out of the car. She put a hand on my shoulder for a moment to get her balance. “I’m fine now,” she said, and I backed off.
    Mary Lou moved slowly, taking small, careful strides. “Three steps,” she said looking at the front porch. “They made me practice at the hospital.”
    My father stood on one side and I was on the other. We gripped Mary Lou’s arms, prepared to lift her, but she shook us away. “No,” she said. “I can do this.”
    She wore a new pleated skirt, like the one she’d worn the day of the burning, but this one was longer and covered more of her legs. Still, I could see her ankles. They looked a bit swollen, her calves puffy from some bandages under her stockings, but if I hadn’t known about the burns I’m not sure I would have noticed.
    Mary Lou gripped the railing and held it tight. She slowly lifted her leg up onto the step. She winced a little, but pulled her body up after it. We all held our breath as we watched her, like seeing a tightrope walker wobble on the wire high above the circus ring. Two more steps and she was walking through our front door. Pinky actually clapped.
    “Mary Lou?” Mrs. Glazov called, coming out from the kitchen. She was wearing her pink polka-dot apron. “That you?”
    “Yes.”
    Mrs. Glazov leaned over and hugged her.
    “You’re right, Tommy.” Mary Lou laughed. “She’s very friendly.”
    Mrs. Glazov blushed. “Dinner be ready in a few minutes. You go unpack.”
    “But I could help—”
    “Ah,” Dad said, “never argue with Mrs. Glazov.”
    So Mary Lou and I walked down the hall and into her room. “It looks exactly the same,” she said.
    I laid the suitcase on the bed for her, and she directed as I put her few things away. When we were done, I stared at the empty suitcase. Mrs. Glazov still hadn’t called us for dinner.
    “I’ll put it back in the attic,” I said.
    “Thanks.”
    I went into the hall and pulled down the little ladder. Careful to step only on the rafters, I found a spot for the suitcase. I was about to climb back down, when I spotted Dad’s old cardboard box, labeled College Days. Jumping from one rafter to the next, I made my way over to the box.
    It contained a notebook filled with my dad’s handwriting. A book or two, dusty with age. And another copy of the Daily Worker. I held it for a moment. Strange that one little newspaper could cause so many changes.
    “Dinner’s ready,” I heard Mom call.
    “Coming!” I yelled.
    And that’s when I accidentally stepped off the rafter.
    White plaster dust filled the room as I fell through the ceiling. I grabbed a board, my legs dangling in midair, the other half of me still in the attic.
    “Psia krew i cholera!”[CE234]
    I looked down through the big hole I’d made. My legs were hanging directly over the dining room table. The food was sprinkled with a fine layer of plaster dust. Mom was already sitting at the table too, and her black hair was now as white as Mrs. Glazov’s.
    Mary Lou and Pinky and my father sat in their places, slightly less dusty, and gaped up at me, their mouths open.
    “What are you doing?” my mother wailed. “Dinner is ruined!”
    I pulled myself up and looked down. Mom’s face was red, the little vein starting to pop out. I could see her mouth open as she prepared to yell, could practically hear the words, Go get your father’s belt.
    But before she could say a word, Mrs. Glazov walked in carrying the noodles and began to laugh. Really laugh. It was a laugh I’d never heard from her before.
    Mom just stared at her.
    Mary Lou joined in, laughing like she hadn’t since before she’d been burned. “It’s so funny,” she choked out. “Tommy stepped right through the ceiling and . . .” She collapsed into giggles again.
    Baby Susie began to laugh in her high chair. A little tiny baby-hiccup laugh. My father joined in then, and his wasn’t a little laugh, no sir, it was a big belly laugh, like I was one of the Three Stooges and I’d just stepped on a banana peel.
    Pinky shook her head and little white flakes fell out of her hair. “It’s snowing in the house!” she marveled, and that only made Dad and Mary Lou and Susie and Mrs. Glazov laugh harder.
    “What is wrong with you?” scolded my mom. But even she sounded less angry.
    “Sorry,” I called down from the attic. “I was putting Mary Lou’s suitcase away and took a wrong step.”
    Dad laughed harder. “And you used to complain he never helps out.”
    Even Mom cracked a smile at that. She took a deep breath. “Well, what are we going to do about this dinner? It’s ruined. And I’m hungry.”
    Dad wiped tears from his eyes as he tried to stop laughing. Mrs. Glazov picked the chicken up from the table and dumped it into the trash.
    “That was a whole chicken!”
    “Oh, Mrs. Wilson,” Mrs. Glazov said. “No one was going to eat it.”
    And that started us all laughing again, even Mom.
    “Come on down, Tommy!” Dad called. “We’ll fix the hole tomorrow. Tonight, let’s go get sandwiches from Mr. McKenzie.”
    Mom sighed and went to the bathroom to brush the worst of the plaster out of her hair.
    “I go home,” said Mrs. Glazov quickly. “Tea and bread fine for me.”
    “No,” said Dad, putting an arm around her. “You’re family too now.”
    “Yeah,” I said.
    Mrs. Glazov smiled and brushed a tear from her eye. “Miracle,” she said. “Like I got to know my grandchildren after all.”
    I was so glad she felt that way. I did too. 
    Mom came out of the bathroom then, her hair brushed clean and hanging loose around her face. "All right everyone," she said with a smile. "Let's go eat."
