
the Bully
By the time we got to school, four different people had told me they were so sorry, Eddie had asked about Mary Lou twice and I was ready to slug anyone who mentioned her again. I practically ran to the chapel. As I slid into a pew, I could feel the weight of home falling off my shoulders, like a horse shrugging off a saddlebag.
    At St. Joseph’s Catholic School we had Mass every morning. That meant thirty-five minutes of peace and quiet—well, except for the standing up and kneeling, and chanting in Latin, but I could do all that in my sleep. And even if I forgot some of the words, I’d just get a real pious look on my face, lower my voice and say, “A fiery horse with the speed of light, a cloud of dust and a hearty ‘Hi-Yo, Silver!’”
    I loved school. Oh, the nuns liked to pretend they were mean, but the worst they’d do was get out the ruler and rap you on the knuckles. Not that anyone misbehaved. No, sir. St. Joe’s was run like Ike’s army, which was okay by me. I liked knowing what was going to happen. At home, if I accidentally dropped a plate, sometimes Mom would laugh and call me slippery fingers and help me clean it up, and sometimes she’d yell for an hour and send me to bed without dinner.
    After Mass we’d say a prayer for anyone who was sick or had died or anything like that. First on our prayer list was always Cardinal József Mindszenty. He was the leader of the Catholic Church in Hungary and had spoken out against the communists who had taken over Hungary after the war. He was arrested, tortured and at a sham trial in 1949, he was sentenced to life in prison[CE34]. So every day we bowed our heads and prayed for his release.
    I should have known what was coming next, should have expected it when Sister Ann stood up and said she had a special announcement. Like all the other nuns, Sister Ann wore a habit complete with a black-and-white wimple. She was tall and thin, except for her nose, which looked a little bit like a pickle. “Yesterday, one of our very own students, Mary Lou Wilson, was burned in a terrible accident.”
    There was a gasp from one of the eighth-grade girls. She must have been the only one who hadn’t already heard. I longed for the earth to open up and swallow me whole.
    “Please keep Mary Lou and her family in your prayers,” said Sister Ann, “especially her brother, Tommy.”
    Everyone turned to look at me.
    I slouched down lower in the pew. All I wanted was not to have to think about it for a little while. Did that make me a horrible brother? Yeah, it probably did.
    I’d never been so glad to file into our classroom and start working on spelling. Lizzie Johnson was selected to hand out the composition notebooks. I groaned. Oh, she was cute enough, with curls like Little Orphan Annie [CE35]in the comics and enough freckles to make it look like someone had sprinkled pepper on her face. But she always batted her eyelashes at me and spoke in this high-pitched baby voice. It was really annoying.
    According to Mary Lou, I was handsome. With dark brown hair, always kept neat and trimmed, and deep brown eyes, as rich and gooey as a chocolate-covered raisin. (Her words, not mine. Who wants gooey eyes?) But I liked being good-looking. I mean, who wouldn’t? When I smiled, even the nuns would soften and give me the benefit of the doubt. Tommy didn’t really mean to knock over the trash can. Tommy didn’t really mean to bump into you. Even if I really did.
    But sometimes, at night, I’d lie in bed and wonder, what if I hadn’t been born good-looking? What if I was like Eddie with blond hair that jutted off at odd angles and blue eyes that weren’t quite the same size. When we got into scrapes together, often he’d get in trouble instead of me. I asked him about it once. “Aw, Tommy, you’re just a smooth talker,” he said, but I wasn’t sure that was the real reason.
    “Hi, Tommy,” cooed Lizzie when she reached my desk, just like I knew she would.
    “Hello, Lizzie,” I said.
    “I’m so sorry about your sister.”
    I frowned at her. “I don’t want to talk about it.” Sister Ann was writing spelling words on the board and I pretended to concentrate on that.
    “Did she really burn up like a firecracker?” Lizzie asked. Her blue eyes were sparkling, but whether from concern or excitement I couldn’t tell.
    Eddie glared at her. “He said he doesn’t want to talk about it.”
    “Well, I was just asking,” Lizzie said.
    I pulled a composition notebook from the middle of the stack, causing her to drop all the ones on top. They fell to the floor with a crash.
    Sister Ann whirled around. “Lizzie Johnson, what are you doing?”
    “Tommy made me—”
    “Are you handing out the notebooks or is Tommy?”
    “I am,” Lizzie admitted.
    I sat piously in my seat, my hands folded neatly on top of my desk.
    “Well, if you can’t do your job in an appropriate manner, I shall have to ask someone else.”
    “Sorry, Sister,” Lizzie said, bowing her head.
    Sister Ann turned back to the chalkboard. Lizzie bent down and picked up the notebooks, but before she moved on to the next desk, she stuck her tongue out at me. She kind of reminded me of Mary Lou when she did that. I swallowed, trying to force down the lump in my throat.
    Eddie leaned over to me and whispered, “Did you bring the paper?”
    “Which paper?” I asked blankly.
    “The paper.”
    “Oh yeah.” I checked my satchel. Sure enough, there it was, right where I had put it. Right before . . . “Here it is.”
    “We gonna show it to the choirboys at recess?”
    I nodded. “That’s the plan.”
    The choirboys were what we called Luke and Peter. They lived in the nice part of town and Eddie and I had kind of a rivalry with them. They were always showing us the new pocket watches or army knives they’d gotten. Now we finally had something cool to show them. ’Cause fighting commies was one thing we all agreed on. I hated communists almost as much as I loved cowboys.
    But before recess, came spelling. And then reading. And after that religion. And then it was finally time to go outside.
    There was no empty field or anything like that. The oldest boys in the eighth grade (that was Mary Lou’s class) brought out long, wooden, black-and-white construction horses and used them to block off the cobblestone street in front of the school. They set up a couple of saw horses in the middle of the street too, creating two sections. One was for the girls to skip rope and play hopscotch. The other was for us boys. The nuns walked in circles, keeping an eye on everyone.
    When the nuns were at the far end of the street, I gestured for Peter and Luke to follow Eddie and me over to a big elm tree. “Got something to show you,” I whispered.
    “What is it this time?” Luke asked. He had a twisted arm from a bad case of polio in second grade[CE38]. It just kind of hung at his side, but nobody dared say a word about it, ’cause that’d be bad luck and then maybe they’d catch polio too.
    Peter snickered. He was Lizzie’s twin brother, and they looked a lot alike. He also had curly red hair, which he kept cut very short so it wouldn’t curl too much, and a face full of freckles. Mention the resemblance, however, and Peter was likely to slug you. Unlike Mary Lou and me, Peter and Lizzie didn’t like each other. “Probably another stupid comic book.”
    I grabbed Peter’s tie and yanked, hard. He stumbled and almost fell on the cobblestones. “Hey,” I said. “Just because Kid Colt Outlaw [CE39]isn’t as famous as The Lone Ranger doesn’t mean it isn’t a good comic too!”
    “Watch it,” Peter snapped, rubbing his neck. “That hurt!”
    “Oh, poor baby,” I teased.
    “Come on, come on,” said Eddie. “Just show them the paper.”
    I pulled out the Daily Worker and held it up so they could read the masthead. Their eyes went wide.
    “All right,” Luke said. “Now that is pretty cool!”
    “A real commie newspaper!” Peter exclaimed.
    “Where’d you get it?” Luke asked.
    But before I could answer, Sister Ann started walking toward us. I quickly rolled up the paper and stuck it in my back pocket.
    She frowned when she reached us. “What are you boys doing?”
    “Nothing,” said Eddie.
    “Just deciding who’s going to be it,” I added.
    “Then I suggest you go run and play,” she said sternly. “We will be reviewing fractions this afternoon and you will need to sit very still.”
    I nodded.
    She walked off.
    “Tag again?” scoffed Luke.
    “Electric-chair tag,” I said.
    Peter nodded in approval. “I’ll be Mr. Rosenberg,” he said. “Luke can be Ethel.”
    Mr. and Mrs. Rosenberg were convicted of spying for the Soviets. Just last June they were executed at Sing Sing prison. [CE40]I’d seen pictures of them in the paper, walking to the electric chair. Mary Lou said it had given her nightmares for a week. I'd thought it was kind of exciting.
    “I don’t want to be Ethel again,” Luke protested. “Why can’t I be Julius?”
    “Better run, you two,” I said. “Almost time for your execution.”
    They ran. Luke was fast, but we finally caught up with Peter by the horses that divided the street in half. Eddie grabbed one arm and I held the other. Peter flailed wildly between us, yelling, “I don’t want to go to the chair.” The “chair” was over by the elm tree. We started to drag him toward it.
    Tommy!
    I glanced up. There was no one there, but I swore I’d heard Mary Lou, clear as day. I knew what she’d say.
    You cut that out right now! Sister Ann is going to see you in a second. Didn’t she say last week that the next person she caught playing electric-chair tag was going to get a call home?
    She had. And the last thing I needed was a call home. So I dropped Peter’s arm.
    Eddie gave me a puzzled look. “What’s going on?”
    Peter took advantage of the moment to twist out of his grasp. “Giving up already?”
    “No,” I said. “I just decided I want to play kick ball [CE41]instead.”
    We played kick ball a lot at school, because of Luke and his arm. But I didn’t usually change my mind right in the middle of a game. I’m sure they would have protested if it hadn’t been for my sister.
    “Okay,” Eddie said finally. “Let me go get a ball.”
    As he went off to find a ball, I could feel someone watching me. I turned and realized it was Little Skinny, Mr. McKenzie’s son. He wore the same clothes as the rest of us—white shirt, dark pants, plain tie—but his were a size too small and he was built like his father, making him look like an overstuffed sausage. Worst of all was the scar on his face. Shaped like a saucer that has shattered, but not yet fallen apart, it was red and raised and covered his left cheek and half of his nose. It made my skin crawl.
    “What are you looking at?” I asked.
    “Nothing.” He stared at the ground.
    I’d become the freak now. The one with the burned sister. It made me angry. I knew just how to make him feel uncomfortable.
    “Hey, Little Skinny,” I called, making my voice as friendly as possible. “You’re the one!”
    He looked up, confused. “The one what?”
    “The one who is going to come play kick ball with us.”
    He shook his head.
    “Aw, come on,” I said. “It’ll be fun.”
    “No thanks.”
    Eddie had returned with the ball. I caught his eye and he nodded. So we ran over to Little Skinny and grabbed his arms, trying to pull him into the game.
    Little Skinny froze like a big round turtle, as if he were trying to pull himself into his shell. Peter and Luke started laughing hysterically.
    “I don’t want to play,” Little Skinny moaned.
    Tommy!
    I let go suddenly.
Little Skinny jerked away from Eddie.      “Ow!” he exclaimed, rubbing his arm. He looked like he was about to cry.
Sister Ann was heading toward us.     “Are you all right, Samuel?” she asked.
    “Fine,” he muttered, and ran off.
    Sister Ann looked confused for a moment. I thought she was about to ask what had happened, so I figured I’d better cut her off. “May I help you with something, Sister?” I asked.
    “Yes,” said Sister Ann, turning her attention back to Eddie and me. “I thought perhaps you boys might do me a favor.”
    “Of course, Sister,” Eddie said.
    “We are almost out of chalk. I was hoping you two would run to the store and fetch me some more.”
    She smiled. A wide, fake smile that made her pickle nose wiggle. She was only asking me because of my sister. I hated her pity. Still, you didn’t say no to a nun.
    “Sure,” I said. “We’d be happy to.”
    Sister Ann nodded and pressed a coin into Eddie’s hand. And we set off to McKenzie’s Grocery and Sundry Store.
