
Duck and Cover
I’d thought getting up at 4:30 a.m. was hard the day before. I’d been wrong. It was nothing compared to the torture of pulling myself out of bed that second day. My rear end was sore, so I rode standing up, which meant my calves hurt before I’d even gone a mile. I wasn’t used to so much exercise, and with the beating on top of that, every muscle in my body ached, even my eyes from squinting against the wind. I was so tired, if Khrushchev[CE47] himself had appeared on my street, I’m not sure I would have noticed. My balance was terrible and I fell off three or four times, but I kept getting back on that bike.
    Ma and Pa were out in front of their house, chasing three escaped chickens that were running in circles in the street in the predawn light. Pa, tall and thin with whiskers like a broom, sighed when I handed him the paper.
    “In my country, Tommy, I was a doctor. Here, I chase poultry and sell eggs to make a living.” He smiled, but the wrinkled skin around his gray eyes still made him look sad.
    “Got one!” Ma yelled, holding a hen high up in the air. “She’s our best layer!”
    Pa sighed again and went to help his wife.
    At McKenzie’s store, I threw the paper at the door without even stopping. The lights were already on at Mrs. Scully’s and with a dress mannequin in every window it looked like she was having a breakfast party. The Russian lady was playing the accordion, a hymn we sometimes sang at school, even though I’d never seen her at our church. The only good thing about the paper route was that it meant I didn’t have time to have breakfast with Mom.
    School was slightly better than the day before. Instead of going to our classrooms after Mass, we all shuffled upstairs to the big assembly room and were shown a film. The movie started with a silly little cartoon turtle named Bert and a funny song that went, “Duck and cover. Duck and cover.” But only the really little kids giggled because the movie was about how to get ready for an atomic bomb.
    According to the film, if there was the threat of [CE48]an atomic bomb attack, a siren would sound and we should all stop what we were doing and get to a safe place. That might be a basement or a hallway. Even ducking under a desk would help, as long as you remembered to cover your head and neck.
    Eddie nudged me as we watched the film. “You can come to my bomb shelter.”
    “Thanks,” I whispered back.
    But if there wasn’t a warning, if the civil defense hadn’t noticed the bomb in time, the first sign of an atomic bomb would be a huge, bright flash, brighter than any light you’ve ever seen before. Then you were supposed to duck and cover immediately, wherever you were, and not move for at least a minute, or as long as it took for the initial blast to pass.[CE49]
    “The bomb could explode any time of the year, day or night,” the narrator instructed. “We must be ready all day, [CE50]every day. All the time. Even on the school bus. Or riding our bikes to Boy Scouts. Or playing ball with our friends.”[CE51]
    This was the part of fighting commies I didn’t like, worrying about how I’d protect myself and my sisters. When the movie was finally over, everyone was quiet. Sister Ann led us back to our classroom.
    “We are going to do our very own air-raid drill,” she informed us. “Just like you saw in the movie. I will count to three, and when I get to three, you will all get under your desks and duck and cover just like you saw in the film. You will stay in that position, absolutely quiet, until I give the all clear. Are there any questions?”
    Lizzie shook her head. No one said a word.
    “One. Two. Three.”
    Everyone leaped[CE52] out of their seats and dove under their desks. I curled myself up into a ball, and pressed my hands over my head and neck, just like Mary Lou had instinctively done when she’d been burned. I could picture her, smell the fire and her burned skin.
    And suddenly I couldn’t stay in that position another second, not even if there was a real atomic bomb. I picked my head up and looked around the classroom.
    All the students were huddled obediently under their desks, their eyes hidden. Even Sister Ann was squeezed under the big desk at the front of the room, her wimple providing extra protection for her head and neck.
    It was all too much, suddenly, too much to handle. How could we worry every second of the day and night? I had to do something, anything, to break the tension. Lizzie’s foot was [CE53]just a few inches in front of me. I reached forward and pulled her black Mary Jane right off her lacy white sock.
    “Eeeek!” Lizzie screamed.
    I dropped the shoe and curled back up into my duck-and-cover position, peeking out[CE54] between my fingers.
    “Who said that?” Sister Ann demanded, from underneath her desk. “I said absolute quiet. Lizzie Johnson, was that you?”
    “Yes,” she admitted. “Someone took off my shoe.”
    “If there were a real atomic bomb,” Sister Ann reminded her, “the last thing you’d be worried about was your shoe.”
    I squeezed my eyes shut. I could feel Lizzie's gaze on the back of my neck, sure she was going to rat me out. But the seconds ticked by and she didn't say a word.
    Finally, Sister Ann crawled out from under her desk. “It has been a minute now. You may all stand up.”
    At least everyone was too distracted by the drill to ask me about my sister.
    Later that day, despite being more tired than an Indian pony on a buffalo hunt, I started winning the marble game at recess. I had knuckled down and captured all of Peter’s marbles and was working on Eddie’s last big shooter, when, wouldn’t you know, Little Skinny walked by. Of course his shoe was untied. A normal person would have just stumbled or something, but oh no, he tripped and he fell right onto me, pushing me into our game and scattering the shiny glass cat’s eyes I’d won all over the blacktop.
    “You idiot!” I yelled at him. “Now look what you made me do!”
    “I didn’t do anything,” he mumbled. He’d scraped his arm and I could see a little drop of blood run down his elbow, like the red yo-yo Mom had gotten from Mr. McKenzie.
    Suddenly, like a great wave was washing over me, I was furious. “You told on me!”
    “What?” asked Little Skinny, confused.
    “You told your dad about the yo-yos!” I screamed. “You’re a rat!”
    “No, I’m not,” he protested. But his lip trembled and it would have been obvious even to Pinky that he was lying.
    Eddie jumped up. “Tattletale!”[SB56]
    “I didn’t say anything!” Little Skinny wailed.
    I grabbed his tie, tight around his fat neck. “Admit it!”
    He stood frozen, his eyes fixed on the ground.
    The choirboys gathered around, watching like we were in a television show.
    “You are going to be sorry you were ever born!” yelled Eddie.
    “Yeah,” I agreed, “now I have to go help in your stupid shop every Saturday.” I bunched his collar up in my fist. The scar on his face glistened with sweat, like a stop sign in the rain. “Admit it!”
    Tears leaked out of Little Skinny’s eyes. “Okay, I told.”
    I punched him in the stomach.
    He bent over double and glanced at me, bewildered. “But I admitted it!”
    My heart was beating faster than ever.
    “You can get expelled for fighting,” Peter said.
    “Shut up!” I yelled. Even though it was true. You could get expelled. “You gonna go tattle to Sister Ann?”
    “No,” Peter said, backing away, as if he were scared of me.
    That made me feel even worse. I’d never actually hit anyone at school before. Mary Lou always stopped me. But she wasn’t there and I hadn’t heard her say anything, even in my mind. Had she died?
    I ran to the bathroom and threw up. It took a long time for my heart to slow down. Finally, I washed my mouth out with water and returned to the street.
    No one seemed to have noticed I’d been gone. Eddie was off tossing a ball with another guy from our class. The nuns were tut-tutting over Little Skinny’s cut arm. Lizzie was jumping rope. I wanted to thank her for not telling on me about the shoe, but I didn't. The choirboys were busy gathering up all the marbles, the blue ones and the green ones, and even the big shooter with the silver and gold sparkles inside. I knew tomorrow they’d suggest we play again, and would divide them up fairly. But I still felt so angry I wanted to cry.
