0
Working for Mr. McKenzie
Little Skinny stayed out of my way all that week at school. I was glad. Every time I saw him I wondered why he’d been at the hospital, and if Mary Lou’s scars were going to end up looking like his.
    I didn’t want to spend my Saturday helping in Mr. McKenzie’s store, so I decided to give back the yo-yos. Then my debt would be repaid and I’d never have to set foot in his store again. I still had the yellow yo-yo and the red one too. Eddie gave me the blue one back and I promised not to rat him out. [SB59]“I know,” he said. “We keep each other’s secrets.”
    Saturday, September 19 was raining and miserable. It took me a long time to do the paper route. I kept imagining what I’d do if I saw that bright flash that meant an atomic bomb, kept looking for places where I could duck and cover. A wall. An embankment. Something like that. I saw no one. Everyone else was safe and snug in their beds, even the chickens. But Boots loyally came along, his black-and-white fur sticking to his sides, making him look like an oversized rat in the rain. By the time I was done, I was soaked through. I put the yo-yos, wrapped in brown paper, into my school satchel and walked slowly to the store.
    When I arrived, there were a couple of customers walking up and down the aisles. Little Skinny sat at the front counter working the cash register. He flinched when he saw me and had to count out change for the little old lady buying eggs three times before he got it right. I’d decided to leave the yo-yos on the counter and get out of there, when Mr. McKenzie hurried out of the back room.
    “Tommy!” His voice was a big, booming growl. “You’re late.”
    I shrugged.
    He put his hands on his hips, looking like a huge, angry bear. “Why did you do this to me? I would have given you a yo-yo had you asked!”
    I didn’t answer.
    He sighed and held out a broom and dustpan. “Sweep out the store. Front to back.”
    “Actually . . .” I let the words trail off.
    “Actually, what?” His bushy eyebrows huddled together, like a caterpillar on his face.
    I gave him my sweetest, most innocent smile. “I decided to just return them,” I said, handing over the small package.
    His face froze, as if an ice storm had suddenly blown into town. Stiffly, he unwrapped the paper.
    “See,” I said, grinning even broader. “Good as new.”
    Mr. McKenzie did not reply.
    “Well,” I said. “See you around!” I turned to go.
    He grabbed my shirt. “No.”
    I jerked away. “What do you mean, no?”
    “How long do you think I would stay in business if I allowed boys to ‘borrow’ items whenever they wanted?” Now he [CE60]spoke so softly I had to strain to hear him. “No, the deal with your mother was you’d work for me on Saturdays mornings, from nine until twelve.”
    “Fine,” I said, crossing my arms. “Then give me back the yo-yos.”
    “Oh, Tommy.” He laughed. “You are a funny boy!” He held out the broom again.
    I glared at him.
    “Sweep,” Mr. McKenzie said. “Front to back.”
    I took the broom. “Yes, sir,” I said, sarcastic as can be. He didn’t even look at me as he walked off.
    So I started sweeping. Every time I thought I was done, he pointed out another spot I’d missed. Five times. Even Mom wasn’t that picky.
    When I was finished with the floors, I had to wash the windows. And dry them, even though it was still raining. Then it was carry boxes from here to there and there to here. While all Little Skinny did was wrap up the items people bought in old newspapers and work the register, pecking at the keys like a hungry bird.
    My anger grew  with each new task. Sure, I’d known it was wrong to take the yo-yos, but to make me work when I’d returned them? That was ridiculous!
    It was almost noon, almost time for me to go, and the store was crowded. Little Skinny complained that he was hungry.
    "You go on back and make yourself a sandwich," Mr. McKenzie said. "I'll take over at the register for a while."
    I was hungry too. And my feet hurt. But no one offered me a break. No, I just had to keep on restocking canning jars on a shelf. I was paying attention, I really was, but one of the jars was wet, which was probably why I dropped it.
    The jar bounced and then shattered loudly into a million pieces.
    Everyone came scurrying over to my aisle to see what had happened. Mr. McKenzie walked up and inspected the broken glass on the floor, like he’d never seen a broken jar before.
    “Clumsy,” he said finally.
    All the customers were looking at me. It was embarrassing. I've been up since 4:30, I wanted to yell at them. I'm tired!
    Mr. McKenzie clucked his tongue. "Tommy, that was careless."
    I was so furious I wanted to slug him. Deal or no deal, I wasn’t going to take that. I turned on my heel and walked off.
    I was almost to the front door when I came up with a great idea. If I left now, Mom would find out and beat me again for sure. But if I found another way to get back at him . . . 
    Everyone else, even Mr. McKenzie, was still gathered in the back of the store where I’d broken the jar. I quickly searched through my satchel. Yes, I still had that commie newspaper. It was a little wrinkled and wet, but that didn’t matter. I slipped my copy of the Daily Worker under the counter, onto the pile of papers they used to wrap the purchases. The next time someone bought a salad dish or a gravy bowl, they’d get quite a surprise. Mr. McKenzie would be humiliated and then he’d see how it felt.
    I picked up the broom and dustpan and sauntered down the aisle.
    Mr. McKenzie looked at me.
    The clock struck twelve.
    “I’ll clean it up,” I said, bending over with the dustpan.
    “You certainly will.” Mr. McKenzie huffed. He marched off and the rest of the customers followed him.
    I quickly swept up the glass and walked back to the front of the store to throw it out.
    Mr. McKenzie was wrapping a purchase for Eddie’s dad, Mr. Sullivan. “Hi, Tommy,” he called out to me. He wore overalls and a white T-shirt, revealing his muscular arms. “Eddie and I were thinking about heading over to Mud Lake[CE61] one of these weekends before it gets too cold. [CE62]You and your dad interested in coming?”
    “Yes, sir!” I replied. Fishing was one of the only things my dad ever did with me. I never missed a trip.
    “There you go,” Mr. McKenzie said, handing Mr. Sullivan the newspaper-wrapped package.
    The masthead was clearly visible on the front. Eddie’s dad noticed it immediately. “What’s this?” he asked, without touching the paper. “Some sort of joke?”
    “What are you talking about?” said Mr. McKenzie. “It’s the lightbulbs, like you asked for. Sixty watts.”
    Mr. Sullivan took the package and unwrapped it, as if it were a baby blanket containing a dead fish. He pulled the paper off and smoothed out the crinkled pages. “Since when do you get the Daily Worker?” he asked, his voice cold.
    Mr. McKenzie laughed. “The Daily Worker? That’s a good one.”
    But Mr. Sullivan’s face was deadly serious. A muscle in his arm twitched.
    Mr. McKenzie stopped laughing and looked down at the paper. His face blanched when he saw the masthead. “I don’t know where that came from,” he said. He looked over at me. I held his gaze, defiantly. I wanted him to know it was me.  Finally, he finally turned away. “I just used the first newspaper on top of the pile.”
    He reached for the paper to crumple it up, but Eddie’s dad snatched it back from him. “I’m going to have to show that to Officer Russo,” he said.
    Mr. McKenzie laughed again, but it sounded forced. “I’m no communist!”
    “So you say,” said Mr. Sullivan. “It’s just a precaution. I’m sure you understand.”
    Mr. McKenzie rolled his eyes. “What do you think? That I’m holding secret communist meetings in my stockroom at night?”
    “It’s a possibility,” Mr. Sullivan said. “All I know is what I read in the papers. And if Senator McCarthy is finding them in the State Department, we can’t be sure they aren’t here too.”
    “Mr. Sullivan,” Mr. McKenzie growled. “I am not a communist, but I’ve known some. They were locked up with me in a German work camp.”
    “The commies aren’t our allies anymore,” Eddie’s dad retorted.
    “No,” Mr. McKenzie said. “Not anymore.” He pulled out a new sheet of newspaper, glanced at the front page (it was the Chicago Tribune) and wrapped up the lightbulbs. “Got an article about your friend McCarthy right here!” He jabbed a finger at the paper. “Now take your lightbulbs and get out of my store.”
    Mr. Sullivan held the package with one hand and slammed the door with the other as he stormed out. The little bell above the threshold rang wildly.
    Everyone in the store was staring at Mr. McKenzie. Including me. They’d all heard Mr. Sullivan accuse him of being a communist. Mr. McKenzie took one deep breath, then another. “Store’s closing for lunch,” he said finally. “You’ll have to finish your purchases this afternoon.”
    Without a word, the other customers left one by one. I started to join them.
    “Tommy,” Mr. McKenzie called after me.
    I froze, but turned to look at him anyway.
    He knew. I could tell by the look in his eyes that he knew, 100 percent for sure, that I’d put that paper there. But could he prove it? Had Little Skinny seen me with the paper at school? I didn’t think so, but I wasn’t sure.
    “I’ll see you next week,” Mr. McKenzie said finally.
    I nodded and hurried off. Suddenly, planting the paper in the store didn't seem like it had been such a good idea.
