1
Guilty of Treason
The knot in my stomach only tightened as I walked home. Mr. McKenzie was probably calling Mom right now. I could barely breathe as I opened the front door and stepped in.
    Dad was sitting at the kitchen table and Mom was at the stove cooking lunch. Her long black hair was braided and pinned up on her head, as if she were going to a party. Her cheeks were flushed with excitement. “Oh, Tommy,” she cried when she saw me. “The doctor called. Mary Lou woke up!”
    A wide grin crept across my face. “She’s going to be okay?”
    “Yes,” said Mom, tossing the spaghetti into a colander with such enthusiasm that a few strands of pasta wriggled over the edge and fell to the floor. Mom giggled.
    “They think she’s going to be okay,” my dad added in a serious tone.
    I turned to look at him. He was unshaven and had a bunch of papers spread out before him. “The burns on her legs were severe. She’s going to need extensive skin grafts.”
    “What’s that?” I asked.
    “When they take skin from her stomach or her back and put it on her legs.”
    It sounded like something from a monster movie at the Tivoli.
    “There’s a risk of infection,” Dad went on. “And, of course, even when the grafts are healed, she’ll have to learn to walk again.”
    “Learn to walk again?” Thinking about skin grafts and infection made me feel kind of sick, like the time I ate a hot dog and a bag of popcorn before getting on a roller coaster. Suddenly, I could smell the wet grass of that morning, see Mary Lou’s penny loafers as she skipped across the lawn. Maybe she would never walk like that again. Maybe it was all my fault.
    “Oh, you two worry too much!” exclaimed Mom. She went to the record player [CE63]and put on Dick Contino playing the accordion. She turned the volume up loud and danced around the kitchen.
    I walked over to the table and picked up one of the papers, just to clear a spot to eat. It was a bill from the hospital. Payment due. $300. Please pay promptly.
    Dad snatched the paper out of my hand. "I'll put these away," he said without looking at me.
Three hundred dollars was a lot of money. But if I asked Dad about it, I knew he wouldn't answer. "When     can I see Mary Lou?” I asked instead.
    “A week or two,” he said. “She’s not allowed to have visitors just yet.”
    After lunch, we all went out into the yard to hang the laundry and work in the garden. Pinky kept running back and forth under the sheets, Boots chasing her like she was a squirrel. Mom laughed so hard, she almost started to cry. She wasn’t even upset when Boots got mud on a pillowcase, just told me to take it down and throw it in the laundry again.
    Every time the phone rang, I flinched, but Mr. McKenzie never called. Dad picked corn from our garden for dinner, and Mom’s Polish plum cake browned perfectly. But a bit of the gooey plum filling oozed over the side of the pan and burned in the oven. The smell reminded me of that awful car ride, and I spent the rest of the evening trying not to remember, so I couldn’t even enjoy the cake.
    The next day I kept worrying about running into Mr. McKenzie and Little Skinny at church, but we didn’t see them. Afterward, Eddie and I went off to the double feature at the Tivoli. The movie theater was just across from the station where my dad caught the train to go to work. The Tivoli could hold almost 1,400 people and had ushers in little caps and jackets to show you to your seat. There were chandeliers overhead, and even an organ that a little old lady played before the show. When the lights dimmed, I let out a deep breath. Here, at least, I could relax.
    The first movie was Guilty of Treason, about that Hungarian cardinal József Mindszenty who we prayed for every day after Mass. I’d seen the film at least twice before (once at school when the nuns had shown it to us) but I liked it. There was this tough American newspaper reporter who went to visit Mindszenty when he was hiding out in the hills around Budapest. The cardinal had all these great lines, like, “One must take a stand somewhere. One must draw a line past which one will not retreat.” And, “We shall teach there the gospel according to Jesus Christ, not according to Karl Marx[CE64].”
    Karl Marx, of course, was the father of communism. The guy who’d written Das Kapital and The Communist Manifesto and those other books commies liked to read.
    But there was another line in Guilty of Treason that I hadn’t remembered from before. The characters were talking about how the communists would try to discredit Mindszenty and spread ugly rumors about him in an attempt to reduce his influence. Then the cardinal’s mother says, “It only takes a little poison to ruin a well on a farm, or to spoil a reputation in a big city[CE65].”[SB66]
    Well, I started squirming in my seat when she said that. I mean, Downers Grove wasn’t exactly a big city, but planting a commie newspaper . . . wasn’t that a little like what she was talking about?
    I shook off the thought. It was just a silly joke and I wasn’t going to worry about it. I was relieved when Guilty of Treason was over and the next movie came on. Big Jim McLain starred John Wayne as a congressional investigator fighting commies in Hawaii. That was more like it!
    When the movies were over, we walked back to Eddie’s. Main Street went past Mr. McKenzie's store and I stopped short when I saw it.
    Someone had thrown a rock through the front window, shattering it. Mr. McKenzie stood outside, waving his hands in distress and talking loudly to the man who owned the hardware store. I could only catch part of what he was saying. "New glass . . . immediately . . . lose business . . ."
    My heart started beating so fast, I was sure Eddie could hear it. I remembered the words from the movie, It only takes a little poison . . .
    "Come on, Eddie," I said. "Let's go home down Odgen." That was in the opposite direction.
    "Takes longer," he said.
    "It's a nice day," I said. "I wanted to walk."
    Eddie shrugged and we turned around. He didn't seem to notice I was distracted, and I guess he didn't see (or didn't care) about Mr. McKenzie because he didn't mention the broken glass either. Once we got to his house, we went straight to the bomb shelter his dad had built. It was in their basement. The walls were made of concrete blocks, creating a space just big enough for three bunk beds hung on the wall, a small table and a pantry full of canned goods, water and other supplies.
    “You see,” Eddie explained, “if the Soviets drop an atomic bomb on Chicago, those people are all dead. But my dad says Downers Grove is far enough away, we stand a good chance of surviving. And look!” He pulled back a small curtain in the corner. “There’s even a toilet!”
    They also had a radio, a record player and a pile of books. “How long would you have to stay here?” I asked.
    “Depends,” he said. “Maybe two weeks after the blast. Then you could go out during the day, but you’re supposed to sleep inside the shelter for the next couple of months. Limit your radiation exposure.”
    He sounded so matter-of-fact. But it kind of scared me. My family didn’t have a shelter. What would happen to us if the Soviets dropped an atomic bomb on Chicago?
    Eddie knelt down and pulled out a box from under one of the beds. “We’ve got a gun in here too, to ward off any intruders, and Dad even bought a Geiger counter.”
    “What’s that?” I asked.
    “Measures the radiation, so you know if it’s safe to go outside.”
    Upstairs, a door slammed and we could hear Eddie’s dad start yelling. His words were slurred as if he’d been drinking.
    Eddie shoved the box back under the bed. “It did cost a lot of money, building a place like this,” he admitted. “Mom was kind of upset about it.”
    There was more screaming from upstairs. I wanted to say something to Eddie, wanted to say I understood. “Wish I had a Geiger counter that told me when my parents were in a bad mood,” I joked.
    “Yeah,” Eddie said, but he didn’t laugh. “Me too.”
    I went to bed early that night and fell asleep quickly. But I dreamed of Mr. McKenzie and Cardinal Mindszenty in Eddie's bomb shelter and they were reading the Daily Worker.
