2
Paint on the Window
When Saturday rolled around again, it was almost a relief. I’d face Mr. McKenzie, see that everyone had understood it was just a joke and life would go on.
    I got up extra-early and finished the paper route in plenty of time. I even had some breakfast and put on a clean white shirt before I went to the store. When I arrived, Mr. McKenzie was outside, washing his front window. Phew. He'd gotten it replaced. The rock probably had nothing to do with me planting the paper in his store. I wasn't sure why the replacement glass was so dirty, but at least it was there.
    Mr. McKenzie grunted when he saw me. “So you showed up again.”
    “Yeah.”
    “Wasn’t sure you would.”
    I shrugged.
    “How’s your sister?” he asked in a kinder tone.
    “Better. I guess.” I’d gone with Mom to the hospital twice that week, but hadn’t been able to sneak off to see Mary Lou.
    He gave me a grimace that was almost a smile. “Grab a sponge,” he said. “Help me get this off.”
    That was when I realized it wasn't dirt on the front window. It was paint. Someone had painted a hammer and sickle on the new glass. The symbol of communism. I picked up the sponge and scrubbed and scrubbed. It came off slowly. My insides felt rubbed raw too, guilt and regret peeling the lining of my stomach like old wallpaper.
    “Is this . . . because of me?” I asked finally.
    “Why would it be your fault, Tommy?” His tone was even, but there was an edge to his voice.
    He knew. I knew he knew. And I was just so tired. I wanted to stop hearing Mindszenty’s mother say, “It only takes a little poison” over and over in my head. Even so, I was a little bit surprised when I heard myself admit, “Because I was the one who planted that paper.”
    “Oh,” he said quietly, not looking at me, not stopping his scrubbing. “Then I imagine it is.”
    That wasn’t what I’d expected. “I didn’t mean—”
    “It doesn’t matter what you intended,” he said. “The damage has been done. It’s easy to start a rumor. Much harder to stop it.”
    I scrubbed harder. The paint chips stuck under my fingernails like bits of dried blood.
    We finally got the last of the paint off and went inside. I was glad to sweep out the store and to move boxes. Little Skinny worked the register, but there were few customers that day. He was careful never to catch my eye.
      [SB68]“Slow day,” [SB69]Mr. McKenzie said once.
    I had a horrible feeling in the pit of my stomach. Mr. McKenzie having no customers, my sister needing to learn to walk again, my mom's moods, it was all my fault. But thinking about it made me feel even worse, so I focused on mopping the store’s floor like my life depended on it, noticing nothing but the stuck-on dirt.
    At noon, Mr. McKenzie put up the CLOSED FOR LUNCH sign. I took off my apron and hung it up. “I’ll see you next week,” I said.
    “No,” said Mr. McKenzie quietly, yet firmly. “Come on back and have a sandwich, Tommy. I want to talk to you.”
    Now, I’ll admit it. I was scared. I’d heard that some shop owners kept a shotgun in the back room. He was probably really mad at me, and rightly so. Maybe he thought I'd thrown the rock too!
    “Tommy,” he repeated. “The back room.”
    As I followed him, I felt just like Gary Cooper in High Noon, walking down the street to confront the bad guys all alone.
    In the back room were a table and four chairs. Little Skinny was sitting at the table. Mr. McKenzie gestured for me to sit too, then pulled three root beers out of a cooler and sat down at the table.
    “Tommy, do you know about Senator McCarthy?” Mr. McKenzie asked.
    That puzzled me. I expected him to yell at me, not chat with me about politics. “’Course I know about him," I said. "He’s rooting out all the communists in the government.”
    “That’s what he says he’s doing. Others think he’s just spreading fear and terror. Conducting a witch hunt, accusing innocent people and destroying their reputations for his own reasons.”
    I thought about Guilty of Treason again and how the communists had made up false charges against Mindszenty. Surely our own government wasn’t doing the same.
    Mr. McKenzie went on. “By planting that paper in my store, you were playing into that hysteria. Now, I hope this will all blow over. Just another mean rumor. We’re already known to be Gypsies, even if we did change our name to McKenzie. But if it doesn’t blow over, if the rumor keeps people out of the store . . . well, I don’t want to think about what would happen then.”
    “What would happen then?” I asked.
    “We might not be able to pay my wife’s medical bills. We might lose the store.”
    Little Skinny stared at the floor, his face so pale it made his scar look even redder.
    “Your wife . . .” I said slowly, putting all the pieces together, “ . . . is in the hospital.”
    Mr. McKenzie nodded. “Shortly after Sam was injured, I was sent to a work camp.” He pulled back his left sleeve. Z8914 was tattooed on his forearm.
    I’d heard of the prisoners in German concentration camps with numbers tattooed on their bodies. But I’d never met one.
    “The Z,” he said quietly, “is for Zigeuner. That’s German for ‘Gypsy.’”
    He pulled his sleeve back down. “I should have died there, but my wife managed to bribe a guard and get me out. We had to go into hiding. There wasn’t enough food and my wife got very sick. She’s never been the same since.”
    “She caught tuberculosis,” said Little Skinny. "TB. It's why she's going to die."
    We both turned to look at him.
    Little Skinny’s face was still pale, but I noticed his eyes were brown with yellow flecks, like the muddy water of a stream where a cowboy pans for gold. His hair was the same shade of brown as mine, and he looked angry.
    “She’s not going to die,” said Mr. McKenzie in a voice that was just a bit too bright and cheerful. It was the voice grown-ups always use when they’re telling a lie. "They have drugs to treat it now."
    Little Skinny said nothing.
    Sometimes I didn’t like my mom, but I didn’t want her to die. I wondered if that was what happened when you spent a lot of time in the hospital. Was Mary Lou going to die too? Medicines didn't always work. I wanted to say I was sorry. I wanted to tell Little Skinny I hoped his mom really would get better. But before I could find the words, Mr. McKenzie went on.
    “Tommy, I may need you to speak to Officer Russo, to tell him you were the one who placed the newspaper here in the store.”
    “Fine,” I said. “But please don’t tell my mom.”
    He thought about that for a long moment, long enough that I wondered what her reaction had been when she'd realized I was the one who had stolen the yo-yos. “It’s a deal,” he said finally.
    I let out a long breath, one I hadn’t even known I was holding.
    Mr. McKenzie told me not to move and went to make a phone call. He was only gone a minute and when he came back, he made us sandwiches on heavy dark bread, with thick slabs of roast beef and rich spicy mustard. They were delicious. We ate the sandwiches in silence. I was just finishing the root beer he’d given me when there was a knock at the front door.[CE71][SB72] Mr. McKenzie stood up to answer it.
That had to be Officer Russo. I didn't realize I'd have to confess today! The sandwich sat in my stomach like a stone. Mr. McKenzie     returned a moment later with Officer Russo. He was the only police officer in Downers Grove and a friend of my father. His brown hair was just turning gray, and he’d gained some weight since I’d seen him last. He didn’t have his uniform on, but he still came in and sat down as if this were his interrogation room. Mr. McKenzie handed him a beer. 
    “Hear you’ve got a story to tell me, Tommy,” Officer Russo said.
    Believe you me, the last thing I wanted was to rehash what I’d done, but when a cowboy has a nasty horse to shoe, he just tries to get it over with as quickly as possible. So I started talking and when I was done telling him about finding and planting the paper, Officer Russo shook his head.
    "Tommy, Tommy, Tommy. Where did you find this paper?" he asked.
    "On the paper drive."
    "So we don't know where it came from?"
    "No," I admitted. "But I didn't throw the rock. Or paint the window. Really I didn't!"
    "I believe you, Tommy," said Mr. McKenzie.
Officer Russo clucked his tongue.     “This kind of nonsense takes time away from us pursuing real criminals, like the Rosenbergs. Or Alger Hiss[SB73].” He shook his head. “Your dad would be most disappointed if he found out.”[CE74]
    “Please don’t tell him,” I said. “I mean with my sister, he . . .” 
    Officer Russo glanced at Mr. McKenzie.
    Mr. McKenzie stared at me a long time. Then he turned to look at Officer Russo. “As long as you pay no more heed [CE75]to Mr. Sullivan’s story,” he said finally, “let’s just keep this between the four of us.”
    “No,” said Officer Russo. “We need to let people know who put that paper there. Might help clear your name.”
    “Do you really think that’ll help?” Mr. McKenzie asked.
    Officer Russo took another long sip of his beer. “You know," he said, "you're right.  It probably won't. Once a rumor gets started . . .”
    “Then if anyone asks, let’s just say one of the schoolboys did it. Doesn’t matter who,” Mr. McKenzie said firmly.
    “Fine with me,” Officer Russo agreed.
    Relief washed over me like rain after a storm in a dry canyon. “Thank you, Mr. McKenzie.” I wasn’t quite sure why he was helping me. Probably because he felt sorry for my sister. But in any case, I was grateful.
    Mr. McKenzie nodded. “Go on, Sam. Walk Tommy out.”
    Little Skinny made a face, but he stood up and walked me to the front. With one hand on the door, I turned to Little Skinny. I’d dodged all sorts of bullets that day, but there was one more thing I was wondering. “Why didn’t you tell your dad I hit you?”
    Little Skinny snorted
    “But you could have gotten me expelled.”
    “You think that would make a difference?” he snapped. “You think the others would have been nicer to me?” He looked down again. “It’s the same everywhere. I’ve changed schools a bunch of times. I’ve told my dad. He doesn’t do anything. He just tells me to toughen up.” The spark went out of his eyes and the scar seemed to overwhelm his face.
    I didn’t know what to say. “It’s too bad about your mom,” I muttered finally.
    “Yeah, well.” He paused. “Your sister said hello and smiled at me on the first day of school. She was the only one who did that. She seemed nice.”
    “Yeah,” I agreed. “She’s pretty special.”
    “Is her face burned?” he asked suddenly.
    “No,” I said. “Just a little mark on her forehead. Her legs are the worst.”
    “Good,” he said. “Legs can be covered. Not faces.”
    For the first time, I really looked at his scar. It was just red, puckered skin. Nothing really scary at all. Kind of like when you pick a scab off your elbow and it’s not quite healed yet. Were Mary Lou’s legs like that too? One huge big scab that would be picked off?
    “Any idea who the communist really is?” Little Skinny wondered aloud.
    “What?” I asked.
    “I mean, you said you found it on the paper drive.”
    He had been listening.
    “That means it had to belong to someone in our neighborhood.”
    Little Skinny was smarter than he seemed. “Yeah!” I agreed.
    “Maybe if you could find out who the real communist is, people might believe it’s not my dad.”
    I thought about what Little Skinny had said as I walked home. I owed Mr. McKenzie now. For stealing the yo-yos. And getting his window broken. And most of all, for not telling my dad about the paper. A cowboy always paid his debts. Maybe I should try to figure out who the communist was. Gary Cooper followed his gut. And if I had to place a bet, I'd put my money on the Russian lady who lived next door.
