5
Talking to Mary Lou
The next day, Monday, October 5, I was finally going to be allowed to visit Mary Lou. The first skin graft operation had gone well and she was feeling a little better. It had been exactly three weeks since she’d gotten burned. Pinky and I had spent nearly every afternoon after school sitting in the hospital lobby. Mom wrapped up a couple of slices of pumpkin pie for me to eat with Mary Lou. I carried them carefully up the stairs and paused for a moment outside her door. The sun was shining in a hallway window, making the floor glow orange, just like Mary Lou had, just before she started shrieking.
    “Who’s there?” Mary Lou’s voice called out. “Is someone lurking outside my door?”
    She sounded like her old self. I shook off the memory of her screams and stepped inside her room.
    “Tommy!”
    Mary Lou was propped up on a bunch of pillows so she was half sitting, half lying on the bed. Her brown eyes were bright and clear this time. The scar on her forehead looked like a smudge of pink [CE91]paint. I didn’t dare look at her legs.
    “It’s so good to see you!” she exclaimed, a smile creeping over her face.
    Until that moment, I hadn’t realized how worried I’d been[SB92]. “You’re awake,” I said.
    “Of course I’m awake,” she said. “I couldn’t be talking to you otherwise.”
    I smiled.
    “Is everything okay?” she asked. “I mean, are you managing okay at home with—”
    “It’s fine,” I said. Of course that would be Mary Lou's first question.
    “Who’s giving Pinky her bath?” she demanded.
    “Me.”
    “And are you really doing the paper route?”
    “Yep.”
    “Be careful. At first it’s kind of hard to balance with all those papers.”
    “Yeah,” I said. “I learned that one the hard way.”
    We both giggled. She was the same old bossy Mary Lou. “Hey,” I said, “Mom made pie. Want some[CE93]?”
    “Sure.” She struggled to sit up a little straighter and winced in pain.
    I put the pie down on a side table. “Let me help you with—”
    “I got it,” she snapped. She struggled a bit more and the blanket over her legs fell off the bed.
    I couldn’t help staring. Her legs were covered in enough bandages for an elephant. Each one was almost as thick as her torso. 
    Mary Lou noticed. "They look bad, don't they."
    "No," I lied.
    "Tommy," she sighed.
    I avoided her gaze and didn't answer. They looked about fifty times worse than I'd imagined. How would she ever walk again if her legs were so swollen and...
    "Hand me that pillow?" Mary Lou pointed to a pillow on a nearby chair. 
    I grabbed it and helped prop her up, grateful to have something to do.
    Mary Lou resettled the blanket over her legs. I felt awful that she was trying to make me feel better. "Want some pie?"
    “Sure,” she said.
    I handed her a piece of pie. We ate quietly for a minute.
    “It’s good, isn’t it?” I said, just to break the silence.
    “Mom’s pies always are.” Mary Lou took another bite. “Did you know that wool doesn’t burn easily?”
    “No.”
    “Yeah. The doctor said my wool sweater probably saved my life. It was why I didn’t have more burns on my stomach and my back.” Her voice was calm and conversational, as if we were discussing the Lone Ranger, but there were tears on her cheeks, magnifying each of her freckles as they rolled by. “They took skin from my back for the grafts. I'm going to have a big scar there too. And on my stomach when they take the skin for the second graft.  Sometimes, it hurts so bad I . . .”
    She stopped talking.
    I reached over and took her hand.
    “I’m scared, Tommy,” she said finally. “I’m so scared. I can't even walk!”
    “I know.”
    The sun was still shining orange through the window. She turned her head to look at it. 
All I could think of was the orange blooming of the paper as it caught fire.     “If I’d just taken out the trash . . .”
    “It’s not your fault,” she said, wiping her eyes.
    “Mom said it was.” I kind of thought it was too.
    Mary Lou snorted, then winced in pain. “Mom always looks to find someone else to blame.”
    That was true.
    Mary Lou forced a smile and took a couple more bites of pie. “And what about school?” she said. “Are you behaving?”
    I’d planned to tell her all about stealing the yo-yos and hitting Little Skinny as soon as she woke up. I wanted to get it off my chest. But now it didn’t seem right to put any extra burden on her.
    “Yeah,” I lied. “I’ve been an angel.”
