7
Halloween, Part 2
So I was already in a bad mood when I got home only to discover Dr. Stanton leaving our house, his white coat draped over one arm, his black bag in the other. My heart started beating faster, like I’d roped a runaway calf and it was taking all my strength just to hold on. “What’s wrong?” I asked. “Is Mary Lou okay?”
    “She’s fine, as far as I know,” Dr. Stanton said. “I was here checking on your mother.”
    Mom?
    He tipped his hat at me. “Happy Halloween, Tommy.” He got into his car and drove off.
    Inside, Dad was sitting on the couch, a pile of papers spread out on the coffee table in front of him.
    “What’s wrong with Mom?” I asked.
    Dad sighed. “According to Dr. Stanton, nothing. He can’t find a reason for all her back pain and headaches. She needs to relax. Calm her nerves. He suggested we invite some of her friends over.”
    Did Mom have any friends? Sure, there were women she talked to at church, but . . . 
    "I though we might have a card party next weekend," Dad continued.
    Mom did like cards. Back before Busia had died, Eddie's parents, the Sullivans, had come over now and then to play bridge. But a party? With Mary Lou in the hospital? It kind of seemed wrong. I said as much to Dad.
    He shook his head. "If Dr. Stanton thinks it's a good idea, it's worth a try."
    I didn't agree, but I wasn't going to argue.  I sat down next to Dad on the couch and picked up one of the papers. It was a bill from the hospital for $700. Second notice, it said. Please pay promptly. I wasn't that good at math, but I knew my dad made about $9000 in a year and . . .
    Dad plucked the paper from my hand. “You don’t need to worry about that.”
So     of course I started worrying. $700 was a lot of money!
     “I’m afraid I need to go to the hospital tonight," Dad said as he started gathering up the papers. "Just need to talk to the doctors about . . .” He pasted on a grin so big I knew it was fake. “I need you to stay home and watch Pinky and Susie.”
    “But Mom’s here,” I said. “And it’s Halloween!”
    “I know,” Dad replied. “But Dr. Stanton gave her a pill and she probably won’t wake up until tomorrow.”
    I nodded. What else could I do?
    It was an awful evening. I gave Susie a bottle, made bologna sandwiches for dinner for Pinky and me and got ready to hand out candy to the trick-or-treaters who came to the front door. I dreaded seeing Eddie or Luke or Peter, but it was Little Skinny who showed up first.
    He was dressed as a pirate with a black hat and an eye patch. His scar only added to the costume, almost making me believe he’d really been in a fight at sea. “Tommy,” he said. “I thought you were going to be a cowboy.”
    “Mom got sick and Dad's at the hospital,” I said. “I had to stay home and take care of my sisters.”
    “Oh,” he said. "My Dad's at the hospital too. Visiting Mother."
I knew I should ask how his mom was doing, but I was too upset about being forced to stay home. Instead, I gave Little Skinny a big handful of candy corn.     I suddenly realized he was out trick-or-treating by himself. I wasn’t sure I would have had the guts to go without my friends. I kind of admired him for it. 
    As soon as Little Skinny was gone, I turned off the porch light and didn’t answer the door again.
    “Sorry, Tommy,” Pinky whispered, as we sat in her bed eating the leftover candy corn. “I know you wanted to go get candy.”
    “It’s not your fault,” I said. But part of me wanted to yell at her anyway, just because she was there.
    I checked on Mom after my sisters were in bed. She slept quietly, her black hair spread out peacefully on her pillow. Dad got home late. He smelled like whiskey. “Grabbed a drink with Mr. Sullivan,” he said guiltily.
I shrugged and went to bed.    
At school on Monday, Eddie, Luke and Peter were talking about all the fun they’d had, the treats they’d gotten and the tricks they’d played.
    “Too bad you had to stay home,” said Peter.
    But I could tell by his tone that he didn’t really mean it. I watched as Little Skinny showed up on the playground with a big bag of Halloween candy, and suddenly I had an idea.
    “That’s all right,” I told Peter. “I’ll just get some now.”
    I sauntered over to Little Skinny.
    “Little Skinny,” I said, “you’re the one!”
    “The one what?” he asked, confused. I didn’t usually speak to him at school. Then again, we had had a nice time carving that pumpkin.
    “The one who is going to give me his Halloween candy!” I snatched the bag from him.
    “Hey!” he protested.
    “You don’t need this, fatty,” I said, taking out a piece of chocolate and popping it into my mouth. “I’m doing you a favor.”
    Peter, Luke and Eddie laughed.
    “It’s mine!” Little Skinny tried to grab it back, but I jumped aside. He was heavier, of course, but I was nimbler and stronger.
    “Guys,” I called to Eddie and the choirboys. “Want some candy?”
    I tossed candy to all of them.
    “Give it back,” cried Little Skinny. “It’s mine!”
    “Oh, you don’t mind sharing, do you, Little Skinny?” I asked.
    Tears started to run down his face, but still he stood there, watching us eat his candy.
    Pretty soon, there was only the rotten stuff left, the jawbreakers and mints nobody wanted.
    “Here you go,” I said, handing the bag back to Little Skinny. “Thanks for the treats.”
Little Skinny took the bag and dumped what was left onto the ground.     “I was going to share it with you!” he yelled. His whole face was as red as his scar.
    The candy sat like a stone in my stomach.
    “I thought I was wrong about you,” he jeered. “But no. You really are a jerk.”
    He stormed off and all the boys laughed. Including me.
    Eddie walked over and punched me on the shoulder. “Did you hear that? He was going to share it with you!”
    I laughed again. A weird, hollow laugh, but no one seemed to notice.
