8
the Party
The party to improve my mother’s nerves was scheduled for the first Saturday in November. Three couples had been invited for dinner and cards: the Colvins from church, the Starrs from my dad’s work and Mr. and Mrs. Sullivan.
    Dad set up two card tables in the living room, one for the men and one for the women. I helped Mom peel potatoes and carrots for the pot roast. Once it was in the oven, Mom went back to bed, complaining of a headache. Dad ironed the tablecloths and I filled little bowls with peanuts. Pinky and Susie entertained themselves on the living room floor, playing with a bowl and a spoon, while Boots kept an eye on everyone from under a chair.
In the late afternoon Dad went to wake Mom. Behind the closed door I could hear yelling.     But by six o’clock, it seemed like Mom had pulled things together. She was dressed, the table was set and the food was ready. Everything went smoothly at first. When the grown-ups were finished eating, they all went into the living room to play cards.
    Once I put Pinky and Susie to bed, I had to do the dishes. From the kitchen, I could hear the conversation.
    “My compliments on your dinner,” Mrs. Starr said. Her dark hair was short and she wore a pearl necklace over her black dress.
    “Thank you,” said Mom. “McKenzie’s had a good cut of meat and I just—”
    “McKenzie’s?” interrupted Mrs. Sullivan. Eddie’s mom was a small woman, with shoulder-length brown hair, cat’s-eye glasses and a thin, raspy voice. “Why did you go there?”
    “He’s the closest grocer,” said Mom.
    “Oh,” whispered Mrs. Colvin, a plump blond woman in an ugly lace dress. “I stopped going there.”
    “McKenzie?” Mr. Sullivan, at the other table, sniffed. He was already on his third beer. “He’s lucky they didn’t arrest him and send him to Sing Sing like the Rosenbergs.”
    The Rosenbergs were the spies who’d inspired our game of electric-chair tag.
    “You know, Catherine,” Mrs. Sullivan whispered, “my husband was the one who found the copy of the Daily Worker in his store.”
    “Come now,” said my dad. “I heard that was a prank. One of the schoolboys."
    I suddenly felt short of breath, as if a hammer and sickle were tattooed on my forehead. 
    "Isn't that exactly what he'd say if he really were a commie?" asked Mr. Starr.
    "Please," my dad said. "An old newspaper is no evidence. Don’t be a McCarthy.”
    “I like McCarthy,” said Mr. Sullivan. “He cleaned up the State Department.”
    “McCarthy is a cowboy,” said my father. He spat the word "cowboy" as if it were another term for criminal.
    “Well,” Mr. Colvin said, “his numbers do keep changing. First it was 205 communists in the State Department, then 57, then 81.”
    “McCarthy is a hero," Mrs. Sullivan added, peering over the tops of her glasses. "If you ask me, even one communist in the State Department is one too many.” 
    “He’s been investigating for years and they’ve never found a single one,” my father replied.
    “They just don’t want publicity is all,” said Mr. Sullivan. “I bet they’ve found plenty.”
    “Oh my,” said my mom loudly. “I didn’t mean to start such a fuss. I only went to McKenzie’s because the meat was on sale.”
    Everyone laughed.
    “I hope it was a going-out-of-business sale,” Mr. Sullivan muttered.
    I walked into the living room to refill the nut bowls.
    “How is Mary Lou doing?” asked Mrs. Colvin.
    I froze. Just mentioning Mary Lou was often enough to set Mom off. But she stayed calm. “Fine, thank you. We had a minor setback last month, but she’s doing well now[SB96].”
    Mrs. Colvin nodded. “We’re praying for her. Be sure to let us know if there’s anything we can do.”
    Mom bit her lip so hard, a drop of blood welled up. “Please excuse me,” she said. “I need to whip the cream for the pie.”
    I followed Mom back into the kitchen. She whipped the cream so hard and long, her arm turned red. “I think it’s done, Mom,” I said quietly.
    She didn’t respond.
    “Mom.” I touched her arm gently.
    She jumped as if she hadn’t even known I was there. The bowl fell to the floor. “Now look at what you’ve done!” she yelled.
    I knelt down and started mopping up the mess.
    Mrs. Starr wandered into the kitchen. “Is everything okay?”
    “Yes,” Mom said. “Tommy just made me drop the whipped cream.”
    “Let me help clean—”
    “No,” Mom snapped. “Tommy can do it.”
    “But it’s really no bother.”
    Mrs. Sullivan and Mrs. Colvin poked their heads into the kitchen. “What’s all the fuss?” joked Mrs. Sullivan.
    “Nothing!” The vein popped out on Mom’s forehead. She was embarrassed and when she was embarrassed the best thing was to leave her alone. But I realized these ladies were just acquaintances, not real friends, and they didn’t know that.
    “Oh dear, you had a little spill,” said Mrs. Colvin. “Let me just help—”
    “I said, everything’s fine!” Mom roared.
    I started at the floor and scrubbed a spot that was already clean just so I wouldn’t have to stand up. Out of the corner of my eye, I saw the three women glance at one another as if they were trying to figure out what to do.
    “We were just trying to help,” Mrs. Starr said finally.
    “Help?” Mom sneered. “By sashaying in here with your fancy pearls!”
    Mrs. Starr’s hand automatically went to her necklace.
    “You think you’re so much better than us because you have a little money,” Mom taunted.
Mrs. Starr turned pale. “They are fake,” she said finally. “I just thought they were pretty.”     She turned on her heel and walked out.
    “Catherine,” Mrs. Colvin chided gently, “that wasn’t very polite.”
    “Oh yeah?” Mom said. “And what do you know about good manners? Mrs. Starr might be a snob, but at least she didn’t show up to my dinner party in a dress that looks like it was made from a tablecloth!”
    I’ve got to hand it to my mom. She does know how to insult people.
    Anyway, Mrs. Colvin turned as red as Little Skinny's. She gave a little gasp and marched into the living room. “It’s time to go,” I heard her tell her husband.
    Mrs. Sullivan, still in the kitchen, sighed. “Catherine, Catherine. You’re having a bad evening.”
    “I’m not!”
     “I hope you feel better soon,” Mrs. Sullivan told my mother.
    “And your glasses are ugly too!” Mom called out. 
    Mrs. Sullivan laughed nervously in the living room. 
    I was horribly embarrassed. I picked up the bowl and went over to the sink to wash it. The front door squeaked open and closed a couple of times, and I could hear good-byes being said. Mom sat down at the kitchen table and began to cry, but I didn’t look at her.
    After a minute, Dad came into the kitchen. “What happened?” he demanded. “We were having such a nice evening.”
    Mom only cried harder.
    “Tommy?” Dad asked.
    I shrugged.
    “Tommy made me drop the whipped cream!” Mom announced.
    As if that were the real problem. As if she hadn’t just insulted all our guests for offering to help.
    “You’re crying over whipped cream? Dad asked.
    Mom was hysterical now, sobs breaking in between each syllable. “You . . . don’t . . . understand!”
    “No, I don’t,” said Dad.
    Mom gave a cry of frustration and ran off. I heard her door slam.
    “Party didn’t work out so well, did it?” I asked.
    “Shut up, Tommy.” Dad looked old and tired. “Just do the dishes.”
    He walked off after Mom. I gathered up the plates and glasses from the living room and cursed Dr. Stanton and his stupid idea.
Sunday afternoon I was playing the accordion at Mrs. Glazov’s again, but I kept missing notes. “We stop now,” she said finally.
    “No, I want to get it,” I said.
    Mrs. Glazov shook her head. “You no play good today. We sit and drink tea and talk.”
    I put the accordion away, and mixed myself a glass with sugar and lemon. As I stirred, the tea splashed over the edge of the cup, running down like the tears on Little Skinny’s face when I’d taken his candy.
    “Talk!” Mrs. Glazov demanded.
    I wanted to talk to someone. That's what I missed most about Mary Lou. She was always there to listen to me and cheer me up. And the reason she wasn't there, the reason she was in the hospital, well, that was because I had been too lazy to take out the trash.
    I couldn't tell Mrs. Glazov about the dinner party. Or planting the paper. But maybe I could tell her about taking the candy. Maybe that would help. “There’s this boy at school,” I said slowly. “Little Skinny.”
    “Little Skinny?”
    “His real name’s Sam,” I said.
    “He too thin?”
    “No, actually he’s fat.”
    “Why you call him skinny?”
    “It’s a joke.”
    “Ahh. Joke,” she said dryly. “Go on, go on.”
    “I didn’t like him. I don’t like him. Sometimes, Eddie and I and the choirboys, we tease him.”
    “Ahh,” she said again. “He laugh too?”
    I shook my head. I knew what Mary Lou would say. Shame on you, Tommy! Picking on that poor boy. And now she would have scars just like him. How would I feel if someone picked on her? 
    “What did you do?” Mrs. Glazov asked, her voice soft, like a priest at confession. It surprised me. I’d never heard her sound so gentle.
    “I took some candy from him,” I admitted.
    “You stole it.”
    I shrugged.
    “Ahh.”
    “It’s not my fault! If Mary Lou had been there, I never would have done it!”
    Mrs. Glazov laughed. “You don’t need sister. You need conscience.”
    I had the horrible feeling that she was right. I wasn’t a cowboy at all. I was an outlaw.
    
