9
Speeding Ticket
The second Tuesday in November I was finally able to see Mary Lou again after the skin-graft infection. This time, she did not look like herself at all. Her face was thin, her eyes hollow, and even her freckles seemed faded to only specks of dust.
    “Hey, Tommy,” she said. Her eyes welled up with tears.
    I couldn’t look at her. The sky was overcast. It looked like it might rain, or if it was cold enough, maybe even snow.
    “Say something,” Mary Lou ordered.
    What should I say? Mom fell apart at the card party in front of all her friends? I stole Little Skinny’s candy when he was trying to be nice? I planted a commie newspaper at McKenzie’s and now he has no customers? I still feel awful that you got hurt trying to help me? [CE97]“I’m learning to play the accordion,” I said finally.
    “Really?” said Mary Lou. She sat up a little straighter.
    “Yeah,” I said. “Mrs. Glazov, that’s the Russian lady who lives next door, she’s teaching me.  She says I’m good at it.”
    Mary Lou smiled and looked more like herself again. “Will you bring it to the hospital sometime? Maybe play a few songs for me?”
    “Sure.”
    She bit her lip, just like Mom had done at the party. Her skin looked so thin, I was afraid her lip might start bleeding too. “Every day here is the same. There’s nothing to do.” She pressed her palms to her eyes, as if she were trying to force the tears back inside. “This is so embarrassing! I promised myself I wouldn’t start crying.”
    “Hey,” I said, sitting down on the edge of the bed. “It’s just me.”
    “I know.” She picked at a stray thread on the edge of the white pillowcase. “I just wanted to finish eighth grade with my friends, ” she whispered.
    I thought about Eddie and Peter and Luke moving on a grade, leaving me behind. 
    “Mom dropped out, you know,” Mary Lou continued. “She never finished eighth grade.”
    And I could hear what my sister didn’t say: I’m afraid I’m going to end up just like her.
    “No matter what,” I said, “you’ll never be like Mom. You’re too nice.”
    Mary Lou sighed, and laid her head on my shoulder. “But she must have been nice too, once. I mean, why else did Dad marry her?”
    I thought about that for a minute. “She makes good pies.”
    Mary Lou giggled. “Yeah. And she likes to dance.”
    “Sometimes.” I took a deep breath. “Is Mom acting strange?” I asked. “I mean, when she’s here with you.”
    “Yeah,” said Mary Lou. “She’s acting nice. Braiding my hair. Reading me books. Like I’m a baby.”
    “Oh.” I wanted to tell her how Mom was changing at home. But if she started acting nicer to me, would she be meaner to Mary Lou?
    Mary Lou sighed. “Thanks for coming, Tommy. You always cheer me up.”
    I didn’t want to make my sister worry. So I didn’t say a word.
    
That night Mom made an unusual turn on the way home from the hospital. “Where are we going?” I asked.
    “I have an errand to run,” Mom said, in a tone that clearly meant, Don’t you dare ask me any more questions.
    But we didn’t stop at the dry cleaner or the market. Instead, Mom turned into a parking lot in front of a small gray building. It wasn’t until we walked inside and through the door labeled TRAFFIC COURT, that I realized where we were. We sat down on a row of pew-like benches and waited.
    “Catherine Wilson?” called the judge, after what seemed like hours.
    “Yes, sir,” said my mother, handing Susie to me and standing up.
    “He’s wearing a black bathrobe!” Pinky exclaimed.
    I shushed her, but apparently not fast enough, because the policeman at the end of the row glared at us.
    “You received a speeding ticket on the morning of Monday, October 19, 1953?” the judge asked.
    “Yes, sir.” My mother walked forward and smoothed her hair back, although as far as I could see, it was already arranged perfectly. “I need to explain. You see, I was going to visit my daughter in the hospital and—”
    “Were you speeding?” he asked.
    “Maybe,” she said. “But—”
    “The ticket stands.” He stamped the folder, and passed it to his assistant.
    The officer came over to lead Mom back to her seat, but when he touched her arm, she jerked away. “But my daughter was going to have surgery!”
    “Next time, I suggest you leave home earlier,” said the judge evenly.
    “Listen here, you pieprzony dupku[CE99]!”
    I sank down in my seat. Once Mom started swearing in Polish, all you could do was stay out of her way.
    “Madam, watch your—”
    Mom stood up even taller, her eyes blazing. “My daughter was burned over forty percent of her body! You can’t tell me—”
    The judge banged his gavel twice on his desk. “Calm down or I will have you removed.”
    “I’ll not let a dupku like you tell me to calm down!”
    I watched as the judge, who was nearly bald, turned a bright shade of red, from his neck to his ears to the very crown of his head. “Unfortunately for you, madam,” he said, “I speak Polish as well. And you will not disrespect this court’s authority with your cursing!” He turned to the policeman. “Take her away.”
    The policeman took her arm and didn’t let go this time. He dragged her off, and as he did, I noticed a vein bulging on her forehead, just like it had when she beat me for stealing the yo-yos and at the dinner party too. It was like a little warning sign that Mom was about to lose her temper, except it always came a couple of moments too late. Mom was still yelling curse words in Polish as the officer pushed her through a side door and she disappeared.
    The room was quiet.
    The judge sighed. “Next case.”
    Pinky and I sat there frozen and listened to the next case: a man who had had too much to drink had backed his car into his neighbor’s bed of prize-winning roses. Susie slept on.
    “Where’s Mommy?” Pinky asked finally, in a voice so low, I could barely hear her.
    I shook my head. I didn’t know what to do. We listened to two more cases, before I realized no one was coming to get us. I didn’t have any money to take the bus home. I didn’t even have a dime to call my dad. It was up to me to get us home, so when the next case was over, I stood up. “Sir,” I called out.
    The judge glanced around the room, before letting his eyes rest on me. “What is it, boy?”
    “My mother—”
    “Speak up, boy!”
    “You took my mom somewhere, sir. I’m not sure how my sisters and I are going to get home.”
    “And I need go potty!” added Pinky, standing on the bench next to me.
    Everyone laughed. Even the policeman cracked a smile. But the judge remained stern. “Your mom is the Polish-cursing speeder?”
    “Yes, sir.”
    He turned toward the policeman. “How long has she been in there?”
    “’Bout an hour, Your Honor.”
He sighed. “I’m sure she’s calmed down by now. Let her out, have her pay her fine and take these kids home.”    
    I thought we were doomed for sure, like soldiers at the Alamo, but Mom seemed okay when they brought us to her. The lady at reception where she was paying her bill was young with dark hair and bright green eyes. Her name tag read O’Brien. “You Irish?” Mom asked.
    “Yes.” The woman sighed.
    “I’ll bet you hear a lot of jokes about the Irish temper,” said Mom as she wrote a check, “but we Poles are the ones who really know how to get mad.”
    The woman laughed. She had a pretty giggle and an even prettier smile. “You must be the one who cursed out His Honor.”
    “Yes, I am,” Mom said proudly.
    “Wish I’d been there to see it,” she said enviously. “The whole building’s been talking about it.” She suddenly looked pale. “Not that he’s a bad boss or anything. I love my job and—”
    “Don’t worry, sweetie,” said my mother kindly. “Your secret is safe with me.”
