6
Gifts
I couldn’t make up my mind. When I was with Eddie, I laughed about his plan to put coal in Little Skinny’s stocking. But when I was alone, I felt so guilty. I kept seeing his mom, picturing her chapped lips mouthing the words as I played the accordion. Maybe there was a compromise. Maybe I could put an orange or some penny candy in Little Skinny’s stocking instead. Maybe I could keep the bargain after all.
    I was still mulling it over one night while doing the dishes when my dad came in to speak to me. “Tommy,” he said quietly. “Do me a favor?”
    “Of course,” I said.
    “I had an idea about your mother.”
    Finally. Finally, we were going to talk about Mom.
    “I know we have the bills for Mary Lou, but I managed to save a little extra.” He showed me a five-dollar bill. “What if tomorrow, on your paper route, you stopped by Mrs. Scully’s and asked her to make Mom a new dress for Christmas?”
    That was it? That was his big plan? A new dress? “Does she need a new dress?”
    “Well, she keeps complaining she has nothing to wear,” Dad said. “I thought it might cheer her up.” He handed me a bundle wrapped in brown paper. “Here’s one of her old dresses to use as a pattern.”
    The paper was from the dry cleaner, just like the brown paper Mary Lou had been trying to burn. I saw her again, walking to the fire pit, a spring in her step, before I shook the image away. 
    "Put it back in her closet when you're done," Dad instructed.
    I nodded. It was worth a try.
    The next morning when I arrived at Mrs. Scully’s house, I got off my bike and knocked on her front door. “Hello, Tommy,” she said sweetly. She was wearing a dress that looked like one of the fancy cakes in the bakery downtown, pink with white icing flowers. “Do you want some hot chocolate?”
    “No. I’d like to order a new dress for my mom for Christmas.”
    “Sure,” said Mrs. Scully. “Come inside.”
    The house was a mess. There were bolts of cloth everywhere and a dress pattern on the table flew up like a paper ghost as I walked by. “Wait here,” she said. “I’ll get some fabric for you to look at.”
    Her dining room table was covered with newspapers, mail and patterns. There were a couple of dishes mixed in with all the papers. I guess I do the dishes too often at home, because I automatically gathered them up. In the process, I accidentally knocked a pile of papers onto the floor. I hurried into the kitchen, placed the cups and saucers into the sink and scurried back to the dining room.
    On top of the pile of papers I picked up was a pamphlet titled League of Women Voters. I wasn’t exactly sure what that was, so I opened the pamphlet. It contained a calendar of events. A list of members. Dates. The addresses of houses where they were meeting. My heart started beating faster. A series of discussion topics was listed: congressional investigations; subversive activity. In that John Wayne movie I’d seen, he’d broken up a secret communist cell in Hawaii. Was it possible that we really had a commie cell in Downers Grove? After all this time, had I stumbled onto the communist?
    “Now, I’ve got a couple of choices for you,” Mrs. Scully called from the hallway.
    I slipped the pamphlet into my pocket just as she came back into the room.
    She laid three bolts of cloth on the already crowded table. The pile of papers I’d knocked over fell off again. Mrs. Scully sighed. “Sorry, I’m a little disorganized.”
    “Yeah," I said. "Me too.” 
    Mrs. Scully smiled and I turned my attention to the cloth. The first was brown, very practical, but it reminded me of the couch at the hospital. The second was yellow and way too bright. But the third one was green, and not green like the bookshelves, but green like an apple before it turns red. “That one,” I said. “It’ll match Mom’s eyes.”
    “Nice choice,” she said, putting the other bolts onto the floor.
    “Is five dollars enough?” I asked.
    “Exactly right,” she said.
    I reached into my pocket to pull out the money, but she waved me away. “Pay me when it’s done. Now, just tell me your mother’s measurements and I’ll get started on—”
    “I brought an old dress,” I said.
    Mrs. Scully pulled out her tape measure and got right to work, measuring and making notes in a little book. “Got it,” she said when she had finished.
    “Thank you,” I said. “I really appreciate it.”
    “I know you do, Tommy.”
    I snuck the dress back into the closet that night while my mom was doing the dishes. She never even noticed it was gone.
I’d decided I was going to buy Little Skinny something for his stocking after all, maybe some penny candy or a deck of cards. I still had a couple of dimes leftover from my birthday. Little Skinny always worked the cash register on Saturdays, so I snuck off one day at recess. When I walked into the store, I found Mr. McKenzie was slumped on the floor, an open letter in his hands.
    He scrambled to his feet as I entered and wiped his face with the white apron. His eyes were red, almost as if he had been crying. It had only been a couple of weeks since I'd seen him, but he looked thinner too, like a bear at the end of a long winter’s hibernation.
    “Tommy,” he asked, sounding surprised. “What are you doing here?”
    “What’s wrong?” I asked.
    He shook his head and held out the letter to me. “Another bill I can’t pay.”
The letter was from the hospital, just like the one my dad had. Third notice, it read. Please pay immediately. I couldn't bear to look at the amount. After a moment, I     folded the letter and placed it on the counter. “What are you going to do?”
    Mr. McKenzie shrugged and slumped to the floor again. “I don’t know. Don’t tell Sam. we'll stay open at least till Christmas. Maybe I can hang on a bit after that. But if things aren't better by Valentine's Day . . .” He shrugged again. “I don’t know. I guess we’ll go back to Chicago. I’ve got a cousin there and . . .”
    He started to cry. I felt so awkward, like I should go, but I couldn't just leave him there! 
    “His mother is going to die too. I keep telling him she’s going to get better, but it’s a lie.”
    Finally, I sat down next to him. I didn’t say a word, but we sat like that for a long, long time.
