7
Deck the Halls
Every year in December, Mary Lou and I linked together colorful rings of paper to hang on the tree. Since we couldn't do it at home this year, I gathered an armful of paper and glue and took them to the hospital. Mary Lou was thrilled. "It's so boring here, with nothing to do," she complained. We spent the afternoon linking the rings together. The next week when I visited, she'd made a chain so long it went all the way down the hall.
I missed Mary Lou something terrible, especially in the evenings. There were carols on the radio, and Dad made hot chocolate, but it just didn't seem like Christmastime. Mom usually     went to her room right after dinner now, and was often asleep before we even put Pinky to bed. Even though she was sleeping so much, in the morning she still seemed tired, and sometimes, if she’d taken one of Dr. Stanton’s sleeping pills, she woke with red-rimmed eyes.
    Even though Mary Lou and I always made the paper chains, we weren’t allowed to decorate the tree. Oh no. That was my mom’s job, because it had to be absolutely perfect. We might put the ornaments too close together or, God forbid, drop and break one. Mom decorated the tree alone on Christmas Eve, after we’d gone to bed, so that when we woke up the next morning, it would appear like magic, fully trimmed.
    But I was allowed to pick out the tree with my father. So one cold night, while my mom was doing the dishes from dinner, my dad and Boots and I went to find a tree.
    The Christmas tree lot was in a wooded area near the edge of town, and was run by an old man. He’d brought in a bunch of new trees that morning. A light snow was falling and the moon was bright, so all the trees glowed like they were covered with tinsel. While my dad talked to the old man about the price, I chose a tree. It was a huge Douglas fir, with branches as thick and strong as the tail of a horse. Boots ran in circles, snapping at the snowflakes, until he lay down dizzy in the snow.
    We carried the tree home on our shoulders, Dad and me. It was the first year he’d let me help, and even though my arms were aching, I didn’t say a word.
    “Dad,” I asked. “What’s the League of Women Voters?”
    Dad turned to look at me. “Why do you want to know about them?”
    I shrugged. “Just heard about them somewhere.”
    “It’s a civic organization for women who are interested in politics and democracy.”
    Oh.
    “I’ve been trying to get your mom to join. Thought it might do her good to get out of the house.”
    “But they discuss‘subversive activity.’ And ‘congressional investigations.’”
    Dad gave me a funny look.  "How do you know that?"
    "I ... saw a note about it in the paper."
    I guess he believed me, because he nodded. “They are discussing Senator McCarthy and his congressional investigations to root out suspected communists in the government. The League has been quite critical of him.”
    “Oh,” I said. I remembered what Mr. McKenzie had called those investigations. A witch hunt.
    Dad dropped his end of the tree as we stopped to rest for a moment. “Tommy, are you still[CE134] trying to find this supposed communist?”
    “No,” I lied.
    “I think you are.”
    “But Mr. McKenzie is going under. I saw him last weekend and—”
    “Tommy,” Dad said slowly, “some problems we just can’t fix.”
    We picked up the tree again and kept walking. Maybe my father was right. But I kept thinking about Gary Cooper in High Noon. Even when he couldn’t find anyone else willing to face the bad guys with him, he never stopped trying.
    Mom, wearing her bathrobe and slippers, met us in the garage with a bucket of water. We placed the tree in the bucket and held it upright, as Mom walked around inspecting it. “Pretty good,” she said. “Except for that bald spot.”
    Dad waved a hand in the air. “It looks fine.”
    “It looks like a big gaping hole,” said Mom.
    “Put it toward the back,” Dad suggested.
    “I’ll still know it’s there.”
    “Catherine.” My dad was exasperated. “It’s a tree, not a precisely engineered statue.”
    “I didn’t say it was a big deal,” she replied. “I’ll just drill a few holes and put in a couple of extra branches.”
    “Fine,” said Dad. The phone started ringing and he walked off into the house.
    I stood there stupidly, still holding the tree.
    “You did a good job this year, Tommy,” said Mom. “I think it’ll make a lovely tree. With a little work.”
    I wasn’t sure if I should feel complimented or offended.
    Dad came back into the garage a moment later. “That was the doctor,” he said, his voice serious.
    No one spoke, but my breath caught in my throat.
    “He said”—Dad broke into a huge grin—“that he thinks Mary Lou will be well enough to come home [SB135]for a few days this Christmas!”
    “Mary Lou—home?” asked Mom quietly.
    “It’s just for a few days,” said Dad. “Christmas Eve to New Year’s. She’ll have to go back for more therapy once the holidays are over but . . .”
    I couldn’t think of a better present.
This news, welcome as it was, sent my mother into a cleaning frenzy. Every spare minute she had us bleaching sheets, washing curtains, rugs, pillows, until our house was as sterile as the hospital. Suddenly, Mom was hardly sleeping at all. Once when I woke up at 4:30 to do the paper route, I found her on her knees in the hall, scrubbing the floorboards with a toothbrush.

    There was a lot of snow that December, which meant there was salt and sand all over the roads. I kept skidding and falling off my bike. Finally, I said something to Mary Lou on one of our visits and she said, “Tommy, once there’s snow on the ground, it’s easier just to take the sled.” The next morning, I loaded the papers into our homemade paperboy sled. It had a long wooden box bolted to a super-long sled. Mary Lou was right: even with having to pull the load up and down hills, the route was easier with the sled. Boots got salt and sand stuck in his paws. I had to wash them with a rag every morning when we got back, but still he gamely came along.
On the last day of school before Christmas break, Little Skinny walked in smiling. “I got the stockings,” he said. “You’re going to love them!”
    “You too!” I said.
    Eddie grinned at me and I tried to force myself to laugh. The night before, Eddie had come over and we’d filled the socks with coal from our basement. But when Eddie had gone, I’d dumped one of them out again and placed a few real gifts inside. An orange. A nickel. An old tin soldier. Then I placed a couple of pieces of coal back on top, so it’d look to Eddie like I was sticking to the plan.
    And I’d come up with an idea, something I could do for Mary Lou. When it was time for recess, I walked over to Sister Ann. “What is it, Tommy?” she asked.
    I told her Mary Lou’s fears about not finishing the eighth grade. “I thought maybe someone could go and tutor her? Help her keep up with her class?”
    “Tommy.” Sister Ann smiled. “That’s very sweet of you. But your sister needs to focus on physically getting better. There will be time to—”
    “But her mind’s okay, even if she can’t walk too well yet. And sometimes . . . sometimes I think it would help if she had something to do.”
    Sister Ann studied my face for a long time. “You’re a good brother, Tommy, to notice that about her.”
    “Does that mean you’ll—”
    “I’ll speak to Father Miskel about it. But yes, I think you might be right. Perhaps a distraction is just what Mary Lou needs.” She smiled again, and when she did, I realized her nose didn’t really look like a pickle anymore. Sure, it was big, but it kind of suited her.
    “Run along now and play with your friends.”
    I couldn’t put the stocking exchange off any longer. Eddie and Little Skinny were already waiting for me under the big elm tree. “Here!” said Little Skinny, bursting with excitement. He thrust a sock into each of our hands.
    We opened them immediately. There were tiny cookies filled with jam and dusted with powered sugar, wrapped in wax paper. There was a brand-new pencil and an eraser and, best of all, a tiny compass from McKenzie’s store.
    I glanced at Eddie. He looked thrilled. Eddie already had one of the cookies in his mouth.
    “My dad helped me with them,” Little Skinny said. There was a strange expression on his face. I realized that it might just be a real smile.
    “Here’s your stocking,” Eddie said, handing it over.
    Little Skinny reached right inside the stocking and pulled out a lump of coal. It was horrible, watching his face change from eager excitement to embarrassed disgust.
    “I knew it,” Little Skinny yelled. “I knew I shouldn’t trust you!” He held the stocking by the toe and shook the coal onto the ground.
    Eddie started laughing.
    “Here,” I said, thrusting the stocking I had filled at him. “Open this one.”
    Little Skinny took it from me and threw it aside. “Eddie, I understand. But I thought you were . . . I don’t know, maybe my friend.”
    He stormed off then, not even bothering to peek inside the stocking I’d given him. Eddie laughed harder.
    Peter was laughing too. “Why in the world,” Peter asked, “would he think you might be his friend?”
    I didn’t answer.
    “Share your cookies with us?” Luke asked.
    “Didn’t you think it was a mean trick?” I asked.
    “Sure it was mean,” he said. “But you did it, not me. I can eat the cookies with a clean conscience.” He grinned.
    I handed him a cookie.
    Lizzie came storming past the barrier then, even though girls weren’t allowed on the boys’ side. Her curly hair frizzed around her head and her cheeks were rosy with anger. “Tommy Wilson!” she fumed. “I saw what you did. You are a mean jerk!”
    Her eyes sparkled like the blue yo-yo had in the sun.
    “Hey, Lizzie,” I said. “Want a cookie?”
    “No, I don’t want a cookie! I used to think you were handsome. But you’re always picking on people. You have a rotten soul and now I don’t even think you’re cute at all!”
    I laughed. What else could I do? Eddie and Peter and Luke were standing there, watching her yell at me. So I laughed like I didn’t care. But I did. For the first time, I realized I actually liked Lizzie. Admired her sass. She reminded me a bit of Mary Lou with her freckles and her temper, but not in a sisterly way. And here she was, telling me that I was a rotten person. The worst part was, I kind of agreed with her.
    “Miss Elizabeth Johnson!” Sister Ann called out. “What are you doing on that side of the barrier?”
    “Lost a jack!” Lizzie called out, holding up a handful of jacks. “Coming back right now.”
    She stomped off. The girl could even think on her feet. Yeah, I liked her. Not that she’d ever speak to me again.
    “Give me another cookie,” Peter demanded. “You rotten soul!”
    The boys all burst out laughing.
    I handed over the cookies. They seemed to enjoy them, but I didn’t eat a single one.
The next afternoon, Boots and I went over to Mrs. Scully’s house to pick up the present for Mom.
    “I’ve got it all ready for you,” she said, as she pulled a sheet of brown paper off a hanger.
    Mrs. Scully held up the dress. It was green like my mother’s eyes, and had a wide skirt that would fly out when she vacuumed.
    “Thank you,” I breathed. “It’s perfect.” I pulled the five-dollar bill out of my pocket and handed it to her. Then I pulled out the League of Women Voters pamphlet and placed it on the table too. “And I, um, accidentally picked this up last time I was here.”
“Thank goodness you found it,” she said. “I’m supposed to bring the snacks next month and I couldn’t remember when we were meeting.” She sighed. “I like to sew, not cook.”    
    “Merry Christmas,” I said.
    “Merry Christmas, Tommy.”
    I clutched the hanger tightly to my chest as Boots and I walked home. Maybe it would be a Merry Christmas after all.
