3
the Communist
Later that evening, I was in the kitchen doing the dishes. My whole body hurt from falling on the ice and I could still feel the sting on my cheeks from where Mom had slapped me, even though they weren’t red anymore. I was about halfway done when Dad came in and tapped me on the shoulder. “Can I help?”
I shrugged and Dad took that as a yes. Oh, I knew he was trying to be nice, but I needed help with Mom, not with the pots and pans! Still, I obediently     washed the plates while Dad did the glasses. 
    “I heard Sister Ann came to tutor Mary Lou today,” he said, wiping a smudge of lipstick off a water glass. “Mom said it was your idea.”
    I shrugged again.
    “It was a good one, Tommy. We should have thought of it before.”
    That sounded almost like a compliment. I scrubbed a bit of dried food off a plate, kind of embarrassed.
    “I also heard that Eddie got into a fight at school. Something about him picking on—”
    “I didn’t hit anyone!” I said.
    “I know,” he said. “Just making sure.”
    “What does that mean?”
    "Nothing."
    "Dad!"
    "Well, you sometimes act impulsively. Like you think you really are a cowboy."
    "I like cowboys." Dad said it like there was something wrong with being one. "Cowboys are brave and strong and honest.”
    “They’re also reckless, vengeful and independent to a fault.” Dad sighed. "Take your idea about 'finding the communist' and 'clearing Mr. McKenzie's name.'"
    “What about it? You defended Mr. McKenzie at the card party.”
    “I like Mr. McKenzie just fine,” said Dad, “but—”
    “Then why don’t you want me to help him? I feel bad that I haven't!"
    "Tommy, it's not—”
    "I really should keep trying. That's what a cowboy would do."
    “Thomas John Wilson, this conversation is over.”
    “Why?”
    "Because I said so."
    "Oh, that's a good reason," I scoffed. "I think you don't like cowboys."
    "That's not it!" Dad's face was getting redder and his hands trembled as he washed the glasses. Any second now, I thought he was going to go get the belt and whip me himself. But I just couldn't stop.
    "No," I said. "You just don't like me!"
    Dad froze, a glass in one hand. "Tommy, is that what you think?"
    I realized I was breathing hard, my heart pumping as if I'd just finished a race.
    "Yeah."
Dad looked horrified. "It's not true. I worry about you being impulsive because     I know who the communist is.”
    In the harsh glare of the kitchen, every line in my dad’s face stood out. He looked as tense as Gary Cooper heading to the final shoot-out all alone. “Who?” I asked.
    “Me.” He whispered the word so softly, I wasn’t quite sure I’d heard him.
    “You?” I asked. “You’re a communist?” Part of me wanted to laugh, but his face was tight and pinched and it certainly didn’t look like he was joking.
    “No, of course not. But the paper came from me.”
    “I don’t understand.”
    He sighed. “When I was in college I attended a meeting or two. Maybe I bought a few papers. I was curious. There was a professor I admired who invited me and . . . it doesn’t matter. I never joined anything. Everything is packed up in some old boxes in the attic. Your mother took it on herself to get rid of one of the boxes without asking me, and I guess one of the old papers got mixed up with the new ones.”
    I couldn’t believe what my dad was telling me. All this time and he hadn’t said a thing. “You could have saved McKenzie’s store!”
    “How?” Dad countered. “Officer Russo went around telling people it was a schoolboy prank. It didn’t do any good. What would have happened to me if I had actually admitted owning that newspaper? Who would have supported you and Mom and your sisters if I had lost my job?”
    I didn’t answer. 
    “Oh, I shouldn’t have told you,” he said almost to himself. His hands were shaking as he started drying the glasses. “But I couldn't let you think I didn't care!”
    My thoughts were spinning. I'd always believed communists were evil, bad people. And my father had associated with them! What did that make him? And did he just say he cared about me after all?
    “Tommy, you can’t tell anyone about this. Look at what happened to Mr. McKenzie, and he didn’t even do anything!”
    “But it’s not fair that Mr. McKenzie is suffering because of you.”
    “No, it’s not,” Dad agreed. “And if you hadn’t put that paper in his store, this would never have happened.”
    I picked up one of the clean dry glasses and threw it to the floor. It shattered into a million pieces.
    “Just like your mom.” He shook his head. “Not a word to anyone!” Dad threw down his dish towel and stormed out of the room.
    I was left in the kitchen alone. I knew I had to clean up the mess before Mom came in, but every shard of glass I picked up made me feel even worse. I was like my mom. I had a bad temper. I threw things when I got angry.
    And worst of all, my father was the communist.
