5
the Sheriff’s Star
It took me a long time to do the paper route. There was a lot of snow. I was cold and slow and I had no idea what time it was by the time I finally got back home.
    Mom was waiting for me at the front door, the vein on her forehead pulsing like a red worm, the leather belt coiled in her hand. “You missed the bus!” she hissed.
    “But I—”
    “Now I’ll have to drive you to school. I’ll be late to see Mary Lou. There's a meeting with her doctors and I promised I’d be there.”
    “Boots got—”
    “Don’t give me your excuses!”
    I tried to push past her, but she grabbed my arm and pulled me into the kitchen. She didn't even wait for me to pull down my pants this time, just slammed my hands down on the counter and started hitting me.
    "Stop it, Mom!" I wailed. "I didn't do anything!"
    I was too terrified to cry. Her blows were wild now, as likely to hit my back or my legs as my buttocks. Panic rose in my throat. What if she didn't stop? Boots wasn't there, and neither was Mary Lou. My dad was at work and wouldn't be home for hours.
    I glanced back at her. Mom's face was as red as Sam's scar, as if she'd been the one burned in a fire. What was I going to do?
    "Stop it, Mommy," cried a tiny voice. "Stop hurting Tommy!"
    It was Pinky. She was standing by the back door, tears running down her face.
    "Pinky!" I called out, not sure if I was asking for her help or warning her to stay away.
    Mom hit me again and I winced.
    Pinky ran over and threw her arms around my waist.
    The belt flew through the air again.
    Pinky gasped. A big welt rose up on her skinny little arm.
    “Get out of the way, Pinky!” Mom ordered.
My little sister shook her head.     
    “Run!” I hollered. “Pinky, run away!”
    But Pinky didn’t move.
    So Mom hit us again. 
Time seemed to slow down. And I t    hought of Cardinal Mindszenty’s line in Guilty of Treason: “One must take a stand somewhere. One must draw a line past which one will not retreat.” This was my line. Mom could hit me, but I was not going to let her hit Pinky.
    I whirled around and grabbed the end of the belt, yanking it out of Mom’s hands. She stumbled and fell against the wall. “Leave us alone!” I screamed.
    For the first time, I realized I was almost as tall as she was. I threw the belt to the floor.
    “Don’t you dare—” she snarled. She rose to her feet and took a swing at me, but I jumped out of the way. Mom picked up the belt and came after me.
    I ran to the front door.[SB150]
    “Come back here!” she screamed.
    I kept running. The sidewalk was slippery and I fell down in a snow bank. My left side was instantly wet and cold.[CE151]
    “Tommy! Tommy!” I heard Mom yelling after me.
    I scrambled to my feet and ran on. Someone was crying, great big gasping sobs. It took me a minute to realize it was me. I had a stitch in my side and my knee was bleeding, but I kept running.[SB152]
    I slipped on the ice and fell down again. But this time I stayed there, half-frozen in the snow. A train whistle blew; a train was pulling into the station. I’d run clear across Downers Grove, all the way to the center of town. I was lying in a snowbank next to the train station.
    I imagined stealing some money. Buying a train ticket and riding out of town into a new life, away from all my problems. If I hurried, maybe I could even make the next train.
    I scrambled to my feet in the icy slush. My fingers were freezing and I’d left my jacket at home, so I stuck my hands in my pants pockets to warm them up. My fingers hit something sharp. “Ow!” I said aloud, and pulled the item from my pocket.
    It was the sheriff’s star from Mary Lou.
    I suddenly remembered how Gary Cooper had wanted to flee his problems too. At the beginning of High Noon, he'd gotten in his wagon and ridden away. But he'd turned around. He’d come back.
    I longed to be a cowboy. Not a bully. But a cowboy who stands up for others. Who fights for the people he loves, for the town they live in.
    I couldn’t leave Mary Lou. I couldn’t let Eddie get in trouble for fighting Little Skinny. I couldn’t let Pinky and Susie grow up with Mom and no one to protect them. Sam would need a friend when his mom died. And if I couldn’t save Mr. McKenzie, at least I should help him pack. And Boots. The little dog had never abandoned me. Didn’t he deserve the same? Shouldn’t I at least stick around to find out if he lived or died?
    “All aboard!” the conductor called.
    I held the star tightly in my hand and like Gary Cooper I watched the train start to pull away. The caboose went by and across the tracks I could finally see what film was showing at the Tivoli.
    One week only! the marquee said. Back by popular demand.
    High Noon.[CE153]
