9
Doubts and Diseases
I thought about what Mr. McKenzie had said all day. When you’re little, you think you can do or be anything. Then you get older and realize, no, John is better than you at baseball, and Maria’s better at math.
    If I was being really honest, I knew I was never going to be a cowboy. There wasn’t a Wild West anymore, no outlaws to be hunted down on horseback with a lasso and a gun. It was just a dream. Just a stupid dream that was never going to come true.
    The mood stuck on me like a fog I couldn’t shake. That evening, I played a duet with Mrs. Glazov in our living room after Pinky and Susie were in bed. I didn’t miss any notes, but the music still sounded wrong, hollow, empty, as if the accordion knew my heart wasn’t in it.
    Mrs. Glazov stopped suddenly in the middle of “On Top of Old Smoky.” She gave me a funny look, but didn’t say anything about my playing. “Tommy,” she said. “I have news.”
    She pulled a crumpled piece of newspaper out of her pocket. “Look what I read in paper!”
    It was from the Downers Grove Reporter. Apparently, a group of local musicians was starting a musical society.
    “You not teach me to read, I never see this!” she raved. “I went to meeting last week. We planning concert. At Tivoli. Trumpet player, his cousin run the projector and he talk to boss and he say we have it cheap. Wednesday, April 21[CE170]. It January 23 now. We have three months get ready!”
    “What do you mean, ‘we’?” I asked.
    “You play too. I be music teacher again! You my star student!”
    I’d never heard her talk so much. She was dreaming, just like Mr. McKenzie. It would only end in disappointment.
    “No,” I said. “I’m sorry, but I don’t want to. Not in front of all those people.”
    “But Tommy . . .”
    I got up and ran to my room.
Later that night, Dad knocked on my door. I didn’t answer, but he still came in.
    “Mom is settled at the Kopeckys’,” he said. “She’s going to be there for a few weeks, resting. Kind of like a holiday.”
    I nodded. Not having her in the house was kind of like a holiday for me too. I felt bad thinking it, but it was true.
    “And you know Mrs. Glazov is going to keep coming over, as sort of a housekeeper and a nursemaid for the little ones.”
    I nodded again.
    “Things are going to get better, Tommy. They really will.” His voice was strained, like he was trying to convince himself.
    “Sure,” I said. But really, I thought, what was going to change?
    “You seem down tonight,” Dad said on his way out the door.
    I shrugged.
    “Don’t worry about Mary Lou’s bills,” he said. “We’ll figure something out.”[CE171][SB172]
    But he had to force his voice just a little too hard to sound cheerful, and that gave me even more to worry about.
The next day on the paper route, I slipped and fell on a patch of ice right in front of the Kopeckys’ house. The sled didn’t tip over or anything, but I fell on a rock and there was a big cut on my knee, the same one I'd skinned running away from Mom. 
    It hurt pretty bad, but surely I could hobble down the road to the next house. I didn't want to go into Ma and Pa's to ask for a bandage because I might see my mother. I had only gone a few steps when Ma came out on her front porch. “Tommy! I saw you take that horrible spill. You get in here right now and I’ll fix you up!”
    “I’m fine!” I called.
    Boots looked at me and whined.
    “Tommy! Right now!”
    There was no arguing with Ma, so I slowly made my way up the steps. It did feel good to go inside the warm house. I took off my jacket in the foyer and followed Ma into the kitchen. It was the same size as ours, but the cabinets were painted blue, the countertops were white, and there was a blue-and-white-checkered cloth on the table.
    There was no sign of my mother. Bacon was frying on the griddle. A pile of pancakes waited on a platter on the counter.
    I sat down at the table and Ma placed a plate of food in front of me. “Eat!” she ordered. “I’m going to go get the iodine.”
    I dug in. It was delicious. As I ate I noticed a framed quote on the wall. Someone had written in fancy calligraphy: Medicine heals doubts as well as diseases[CE173]. I liked that.
    I heard footsteps outside the kitchen. What if it was my mother, coming in for breakfast? What would I say to her? The pancake stuck in my throat.
    But it wasn’t my mom. It was Pa, wearing a navy-blue bathrobe. “Morning, Tommy,” he said, as if he saw me in his kitchen every morning.
    “Is it true?” I asked.
    “What?”
    “That quote on the wall.” I gestured to the frame. “Can you do that?”
    “Ah. Medicine as healing doubts. Word of wisdom from our dear friend Karl Marx.”
    “Karl Marx said that?” I asked.
    Pa laughed. “Do you have a problem with that?”
    “Karl Marx is the father of communism!”
    “He came up with the idea of communism. I’d say it didn’t turn out quite like he expected.”
    Pa sounded almost like my father, and yet I was pretty sure he wasn’t a Soviet spy either.
    Ma came back with the bandage for my knee, and we all sat down for breakfast.
    As we ate, Pa and Ma told me all about Prague. That was the capital of Czechoslovakia and it was where they had come from. There was a castle and a river. “And so many churches,” said Ma, her eyes bright and shining, “that people called it the city of a hundred spires!”
    “If it was so great, why did you leave?” I asked.
    “We didn’t want to,” said Pa. “After studying in Vienna, I became a professor of medicine at Charles University[CE174]. It is one of the oldest and most prestigious universities in Europe.”
    “He speaks Czech, Slovak, English, German and Russian,” Ma said proudly. “I only learned Czech, Slovak and English.”
    Two more than me, I thought to myself.
    Pa sighed. “We outlasted the Nazis, and when the war ended, I thought our problems were over. But in 1948 the KSC[CE175], the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, took over[CE176]. Because I spoke out against them, I was dismissed from my post at the university and forced to flee.”
    “It’s okay,” Ma said, patting his wrinkled hand like he was a tired child.
    “No, it’s not,” Pa said. “There, I was an educated man. A leader. Here, I am a poor chicken farmer.”
    Pa turned to look me in the eye. “The communists didn’t just take away my right to vote and express my opinions, they took away my job and my home. Yes, I have read Karl Marx, Tommy. I like some of the things he said. But I am not a communist.”
    This was too much to think about so early in the morning. It was time to go. My knee felt better, and I had to finish the paper route. I walked to the door, put on my coat and heard a little intake of breath, almost like a tiny gasp.
    There in the hallway was my mother.
    She still had a bandage on her head, but it was a smaller one now. Her black eye had faded to yellow and purple. Her long dark hair was tangled, as if she had just woken up. She wore a white, long-sleeved nightgown that came down to her ankles and made her look like a ghost.
    My arms and legs tingled. I felt like I needed to run. We stared at each other, not saying a word. I wanted to leave, but I couldn’t seem to make my legs move.
    Ma walked into the hallway. “Ah, Catherine,” she said, taking Mom's arm and leading her into the kitchen. “I’ve got the coffee all ready. You must be hungry.”
    The spell was broken. I slipped out the door without saying a word.
    
    Monday morning, Sister Ann pulled Eddie, Sam and me aside just before the afternoon recess. “Good news, Eddie,” Sister Ann said. “Father Miskel has reconsidered your expulsion. Instead, you and Tommy”—she turned to look at me—“will spend the next month cleaning the boys’ restroom during recess.”[SB177]
    “What’s going to happen to me?” asked Sam.
    “In light of the information Tommy provided,” Sister Ann said, “you are being let off with a warning. Tommy and Eddie, you two may start your punishment now.” She handed us each a bucket and scrub brush.
    I thought Eddie would be happy he wasn’t getting expelled, but he said nothing.  Once we got to the restroom, he started to scrub so hard, I was afraid he was going to rub the bristles right off the brush. He wouldn’t even look at me. It was a long afternoon.
