4
Talking to Eddie
For the rest of February and the first half of March, Mrs. Glazov and I practiced the accordion every night after dinner. Dad did the dishes while Pinky and Susie played on the floor and listened. Dad knew how to give Susie a bottle now. And Mrs. Glazov’s cooking seemed to agree with him, because his face started to fill out, the crevices looking not quite as deep.
    We’d settled into a nice routine at home. No yelling. No moods. One day, as I was doing the paper route, I realized home was no longer the wild saloon, where I had to stop if I wanted a drink. No, now it was more like a peaceful watering hole, where I could pull my hat down over my eyes and take a rest.
    But if things were going okay at home for once, school was another matter. Recess was now my least favorite time of day. Eddie wouldn’t speak to me while we cleaned the bathrooms, and worse, he spent his lunch hour harassing Sam, tripping him or stealing his jacket. I didn’t know what to do. I liked Sam, but I liked Eddie too, at least the old Eddie who used to do things with me.
    One day, I was standing by the horses watching Eddie and Peter chasing Sam around the street, when Luke came up to me. That was kind of odd. He and Peter usually did everything together. “Hi, Tommy,” he said.
    “Hi,” I said. “Why aren’t you with Peter?”
    “He and Eddie are teasing Sam,” Luke shrugged. “It makes me feel kind of bad.”
    “Yeah," I agreed. "Me too."
    “Come on, Tommy,” Luke scoffed. “We saw what you did to Sam with those stockings before Christmas. And everyone heard what you said on the bus.”
    I’d forgotten about that. “I’m sorry,” I said. “I shouldn’t have said that about your arm.”
    Luke shrugged. “I know it’s the only thing that’s protected me from your teasing in the past. No one wants to mention it. They don’t want to have the bad luck to get polio too.”
    "I really do feel bad about how I treated Sam," I admitted. "I guess I wanted to be a cowboy, big and strong and tough."
    “I’d like to be a cowboy too," Luke said. "But there aren’t any cowboys with polio.”
    “FDR had polio,” I said.
    “Yeah, yeah,” Luke admitted. “Being president is pretty cool. But not as cool as Gary Cooper. Sometimes I’d just like to . . .”
    “Scream?” I suggested.
    “Yeah,” Luke agreed. “Or hit someone. But, well . . .” He gestured to his arm.
    We both laughed. It felt good to actually talk about those open secrets that everyone knew.
    “Maybe I should go tell Eddie to knock it off,” I said.
    “Yeah,” Luke agreed. “Maybe you should.”
I didn’t get up the nerve to talk to Eddie until that afternoon when we were scrubbing the bathroom. Usually Eddie did one side and I did the other, but that day I walked over to his section. “Eddie, I—”
    “I don’t want to talk to you.”
    “Come on, Eddie. You can’t give me the silent treatment forever.”
    He threw down his brush. “Why?” he screamed. “Why did you turn on me?”
    Eddie sounded like me when I’d thrown that glass. He sounded like my mom. I didn’t like it. “I didn’t turn on you,” I said.
    “Sure feels like it! I always kept your secrets. How many times did I get punished and you didn’t, only because I kept my mouth shut?”
    It had been a lot of times. “I’m sorry.”  It seemed like I was always apologizing now.
    He crossed his arms and leaned against the wall. “Anything else you wanted to say?”
    “Actually, yeah." I took a deep breath. "I think you should stop teasing Sam.”
    “Why?” he asked. “It’s fun. You had fun picking on him too.”
    It had been kind of fun. “I know,” I admitted. “But . . .” How could I explain it in a way Eddie would understand? “It’s like Luke. Would you ever tease Luke about his arm?”
    “No!” protested Eddie.
    “Why not? You don’t like him much. Don’t you think he’s kind of stuck up?”
    “Yeah, but it just wouldn’t be right,” said Eddie. “He didn’t ask to get polio.”
    “Do you think Sam asked for that bomb?” I said. “Or to be born in Nazi Germany? How is Sam’s face any different from Luke’s arm?”
    He didn’t answer.
    “It’s not different,” I said. “Except you didn’t grow up with him.”
    Eddie was silent for a long time.
    “It was all in fun,” said Eddie. “Not my fault if he can’t take a joke.”
    “But you wouldn’t play that kind of a joke on Luke,” I pointed out again.
    Eddie looked thoughtful. “No,” he said quietly, “we all play kick ball with him.”
    “Exactly,” I said.
    “You’re the one who started calling him Little Skinny! Why are you so high-and-mighty now?”
    I shrugged. “He’s not a bad guy.”
    “He’s a communist!”
    “No—I told you. That was my fault. I planted the paper there.”
    “Yeah, but it had to come from somewhere. It was probably them.”
    I shook my head again. “No, I know where it came from.”
    “Yeah, right.”
    Eddie picked up his brush and started scrubbing again.
    “I really do.”
    “Then why don’t you tell me?”
    I shook my head. “I promised to keep it a secret.”
    “Well,” Eddie snapped. “I'm not the one who's bad at keeping secrets."
    “I didn’t mean it like that.”
    “No,” Eddie said, “you just meant that you don’t trust me. Even though I haven’t given you any reason not to!”
    I felt as mixed up as a lost calf in the middle of a cattle drive. He was right. And I didn’t want to lose Eddie as a friend. There was only one way to show him that I still trusted him.
    “All right,” I said finally. “I’ll tell you.”
    Eddie put down his scrub brush and put his hands on his hips.
    I glanced around to make sure no one else was in the bathroom with us, even though I knew full well that it was deserted. Pa hadn’t thought it was a big deal. Maybe Eddie wouldn’t either.
    “Well?”
    I took a deep breath, trying to pretend my heart wasn't going thump, thump, thump. “The paper was from my dad.”
    Eddie rolled his eyes. “Ha-ha. Very funny.” He picked up the scrub brush and returned to work.
    “No, really,” I said. “He attended a couple of meetings in college and . . .”
    Eddie sat back on his heels and stared at me. His hair stuck out like bits of hay and his eyes were wide. “You’re serious?”
    I nodded, my words caught in my throat.
    “Your dad is a communist?”
    “No, not a communist. He just read about it a little.”
    “But you said he attended a couple of meetings?”
    “Yeah, but—”
    “That makes him a communist.”
    This was a mistake. Dad had warned me that I was impulsive. I’d wanted to win Eddie back over to my side, to let him know I trusted him, to let him know he really was still my friend. But now that I’d told him, I’d made our family vulnerable. What if he started a rumor about us, the way I had about Mr. McKenzie? “Eddie! You’ve known my dad your whole life.”
    “Yeah, and I’ve known you too. I didn’t think you would betray me either.”
    “Communism is just an idea,” I said, and I realized I sounded like Dad. “A bad idea but . . . haven’t you ever had a bad idea?”
    “Yeah,” said Eddie. “Being friends with you.”
    I snorted and laughed. A big nervous laugh. “Yeah, that was a pretty bad idea.”
    Eddie frowned harder.
    “Look, Sam is helping me organize a concert for Mary Lou.”
    “For Mary Lou?” he asked.
    Maybe that was the way to win him over. Of course he wanted to help her.
    “Yeah. I’m getting up at four o’clock on Sunday morning to put flyers about the concert in the paper,” I said.
    “Four o’clock in the morning?” asked Eddie.
    “Yeah,” I said.
    “That’s awful early,” he said.
    “It’s when I’m getting up,” I repeated. “You want to help, come to my house then.”
    I picked up my brush and started scrubbing, desperately trying to rub away the thought that I'd made another mistake by telling Eddie about my dad. “Seriously,” I said. “You know we were awful to Sam.”
    “Yeah,” Eddie agreed. “I guess we were.”
    We cleaned the floor in silence for a while. “Really?” Eddie asked suddenly. “Your dad’s the communist?”
    “Eddie!” I exclaimed. “You can’t tell anyone.”
    “Yeah, yeah.”
    “I mean it! Look what happened to Mr. McKenzie.”
    “I know.” He scrubbed harder, putting all his concentration onto one little spot of dirty floor. “I know how to keep a secret.” And something about the way he said it, something about the way his eyes flashed dark as midnight for just a moment, made me wonder what secrets Eddie was keeping from me.
    “Not anyone,” I repeated.
    “I don’t rat out my friends,” he said. “Unlike some people I know.”
    “Guess I deserved that,” I said.
    “Sure did.” He turned and grinned at me.
    I grinned back. I told myself Eddie would keep my secret.
    But I wasn't completely sure.
