7
After the Music
After the concert, I stood in the lobby, looking back in at the theater. Not quite believing that I’d done it. That I’d managed to play and perform and do a good job in front of all those people. I felt a tap on my shoulder.
    It was Mary Lou. She was standing. Leaning on a cane, sure, but standing. A nurse waited patiently a few feet away.
    “You did a great job,” Mary Lou said, smiling.
    “It wasn’t just me,” I said. “Lots of people—”
    “No, Tommy,” Mary Lou said. “It was mainly you.”
    My ears itched and my cheeks felt hot.
    “You’re blushing,” Mary Lou teased.
    “No, I’m not.”
    “Anyway,” Mary Lou said, “I just saw Sister Ann and she said I should be able to finish the eighth grade with my class after all and go on to high school next year.” She said ‘high school’ like it was the World Series.
    “That’s great.”
    “’Course, I need to get out of the hospital first. The doctors said maybe in another month."
    "A month's not too long," I said.
    "No," Mary Lou said, "it's not."
     The nurse came up and gently touched her arm.
    “We have to leave soon. I'm going to go say bye to Mom and Dad. See you soon!”
    I gave her a big hug and watched her hobble off with the nurse standing right beside her.
    Lizzie Johnson came up to me next, her red hair pulled back in one big French braid, though little curls kept escaping. I wanted to tuck them behind her ear.
    “Hi, Tommy,” she said. “I didn’t know you could play the accordion!”
    “Yeah, well, I learned.”
    We both stared at our shoes, as if there was something really interesting on the carpet.
    “Hey, Lizzie,” I said finally.
    “Yes?” She looked up at me eagerly.
    “I shouldn’t have said your freckles looked like a lizard,” I said. “I actually like them.”
    “Really?”
    “Yeah. I mean Mary Lou has freckles too.”
    “Oh.” Lizzie looked disappointed.
    Perhaps telling a girl she looked like your sister was not the right thing to say. [SB214]“Do you like ice cream?” I asked, desperate to change the subject.
    “Who doesn’t like ice cream?”
    “Yeah, well, they’re gonna have some at Sam’s shop.” Then I added quickly, before I could chicken out, “We should get a float there sometime.”
    She smiled. “That’d be nice.”
    “Really?”
    “Yeah.”
    And before I could say anything else she walked away.
    Sister Ann came over to me then, with two other nuns from school. “Tommy,” she said. “You’ve done a wonderful thing. Over a hundred people showed up. Many gave more than one dollar.” She gestured to the basket she was holding. “I’m going to take all this money over to your father.”
    I smiled. “Thank you.”
    “And I was thinking,” Sister Ann said, “maybe we should have another concert next year. Make it a tradition.” As they walked off, I heard her say, “Did you know, Sister Rose, that in my youth I used to play the oboe?”
    Sister Rose laughed. “No, Sister Ann. I did not.”
    I looked for something to eat then, but the buffet Mr. McKenzie had carefully laid out had been picked over till there was nearly nothing left. Ma pointed at it as she walked off. “I do have to admit,” she said, “those watercress sandwiches were really good. Almost as good as mine.”
    “Better,” said Pa.
    She whacked him with her purse, and they both laughed.
    “Like your bow tie,” Pa said, and winked at me.
    “Thanks,” I said, and smiled as they walked out.
    After they left, Mr. McKenzie came up to me. “Look at this, Tommy!” He held up a bunch of papers. “Did you see how many order forms I got?”
    “How many?” I asked.
    “I don’t know,” he said excitedly. “I haven’t had a chance to count them. All the league ladies ordered something. And you know that man from the hospital? Well, they’re having some sort of a picnic this summer and they wanted to know if I could provide all the sandwiches. For a hundred people. And—”
    “Is it . . . is it going to work?” I asked.
    “I don’t know, Tommy. We have minds to change. Some people will probably always think I’m a communist. But you know what?”
    “What?”
    Mr. McKenzie grinned, his dark eyes flashing. “It feels awfully good to have a chance to try out my dream.” [SB215]He picked me up in a big bear hug, lifting me off the ground.
    “Hey!”
    He put me back down and laughed. “Got to go count my forms!”
    Mom came over to me next. The green dress made her eyes shine. Despite the new gray in her hair, she looked younger than she had before. Susie was sleeping in her arms.
    “Hi, Tommy,” Mom said shyly.
    “Hi,” I said.
    “The concert was wonderful.”
    “Thanks.”
    We stood there in an awkward silence.
    “I’m sorry,” she said.
    “For what?”
    “For everything.” Her voice trembled a little. "Pa suggested that maybe next time you get in trouble, I let Dad give you your punishment. I think that's a good idea."
    "Yeah," I said. "Me too."
    She'd never apologized to me before. [CE217]Never. Maybe talking with Pa really had done her some good. And suddenly, like a flash flood in a dry canyon, all the reasons I loved my mom came roaring back. The pies she baked. How she danced to polka music in the kitchen. Even her toughness, because without that, how would she have found the strength to smother the flames and save Mary Lou?
    “Does it help?” she asked. “Saying I’m sorry.”
    “Yes,” I said, and smiled. “It does.”
    Susie woke up and started to cry, and as Mom walked off to feed her, Sam came up to me. “You ever played before an audience before?”
    I shook my head.
    “How was it?” he asked.
    “Terrifying,” I admitted. “But then, once I got started, I guess it was kind of okay.”
    “You did a good job,” he said, and handed me some rolled-up papers.
    “What’s this?” I asked.
    “One of my stories,” he said. “I figured, if you can play in front of all those people, I can let you read one of my stories.”
    I glanced at the front page: The Adventures of Cowboy Sam. “Thanks.”
    Sam gave me a shy smile. “I’m going to leave now before I change my mind.”
    I laughed as he ran off.
Everyone was just about gone by then. The lobby was almost empty. Sam had given his hat and jacket back to one of the real ushers, who was sweeping up and getting ready for the next day’s show.
    The only person I didn’t get to say good-bye to was Eddie. Through the big glass doors, I saw him on the sidewalk in front of the Tivoli, arguing with his father. His dad pointed at us, then angrily shoved him into the car. I waved, but I don’t think he saw me.
    Finally, it was just Dad and me, looking at an old ad for High Noon.
    “You know,” said Dad softly when I walked up to him, “I was wrong before when I was cowboys were reckless, vengeful and independent to a fault. It wasn’t the shoot-out that made Gary Cooper a great man. It was that he cared for others. He faced his problems. He didn’t walk away. He solved them. A good cowboy is a leader who looks after his herd and his posse. No one goes missing. Kind of like you.”
    And for the first time in ages, for the first time since before Mary Lou had gotten burned, I knew who I was. I was Tommy John Wilson. A paper cowboy.[CE218][SB219]
