
Visiting Mary Lou
After school, before I could get on the bus, Mom met me on the front steps. At first glance, she looked okay. Her dress was neat and ironed, she’d combed her hair and put on a necklace and lipstick. But her eyes were wild, a mix of brown and green. For a moment, I thought she’d heard about the incident on the playground. But she only grabbed my arm and said, “Come on. We’re going to go see Mary Lou.”
I was relieved.  If Mary Lou was allowed to have visitors, it must mean she was doing better!  W    hat I discovered, after forty-five minutes in the car, was that Mom and the baby were going to see Mary Lou, not me. I was so disappointed I wanted to burst into tears. But there was Pinky, holding my hand, looking up at me with big brown eyes. [SB57]
    We sat in the waiting room for two hours. I gave Pinky an old piece of paper from my school satchel and she drew big round scribbles over and over while I did my homework. Finally, her crayon broke and she started to cry. Pinky climbed into my lap and I rocked her and sang “Baa, Baa, Black Sheep[CE58]” about fifty-seven times.
    I was so frustrated about not seeing Mary Lou I felt like I was going to explode. Finally, Pinky fell asleep and I placed her on the couch. She rolled over, but didn’t wake up. This was my chance. I ran for the stairs.
    I reached the stairwell just before my mother and a doctor walked into the lobby. I could hear Mom wailing, “Morphine? But she’ll become an addict!”
    “We know what we’re doing,” said the doctor, his voice low and soothing. “There’s nothing else to control the pain. We can wean her off it slowly and . . .”
    I didn’t wait to hear the rest. I ran up the stairs two at a time, and poked my head out into the hall. No one was there. I was pretty sure Mary Lou’s room number was 320, so I ducked into that room and pulled the curtain.
    The figure in the bed didn’t move. It was wrapped up in bandages, lots of them, like a picture of a mummy I’d seen in the encyclopedia Mom had at home. The person was turned away, facing the wall, so all I could see was long brown hair. There was a brush on the bedside table, and the hair was smooth, as if someone had just finished combing it.
    I crept over to look at the person in the bed.
    It was Mary Lou. I couldn’t speak. She looked both better and worse than I had expected. Her legs were covered with bandages so thick they resembled sausages. Her face was puffy but unmarked, except for a scar on her forehead that her hair would cover. As I stared at the freckles on her nose —just the same as they’d always been—her eyelashes fluttered, like spiders dancing on her eyelids.
    “Mary Lou,” I whispered. “It’s me.”
    Her eyes opened for a moment, looking big and unfocused. “Tommy?” she mumbled.
    I waited a long time, but she didn’t open her eyes again. Her breathing was slow and steady, as if she were asleep. But she was breathing. She was alive.
    Finally, I turned to go. I hurried down the hall, then sat in the stairwell for a minute, just to catch my breath. That’s when I started crying. Really sobbing. My sister was alive and I knew I should be happy and thanking God, but I couldn’t stop crying. It was embarrassing. All I could think was, cowboys do not sob like babies. But then I remembered that Mary Lou might end up looking like Little Skinny, and the thought only made me sob harder.
    Suddenly, I heard a door open on a floor above me. I held my breath. Someone else was in the stairwell with me. I jumped up, and started down the stairs, wanting to avoid whomever it was.
    But the door hadn’t been on the floor above me, it had been on the floor below, which meant I ran smack into a boy standing in the stairwell.
    It was Little Skinny.
    Even though I’d just been thinking about him, he was the last person I expected to see. For a moment, I was so embarrassed I couldn’t breathe. There I was, my eyes all red, my face smudged and dirty. That was when I realized he was crying too, great big silent tears that fell down his red scar, onto the white, starched collar of his shirt.
    “Are you going to hit me again?” he asked.
    I didn’t answer, just pushed past him and ran back to the lobby. Mom, Susie and Pinky were sitting on the couch, waiting for me.
    “Where have you been?” Mom snapped.
    “I had to go to the bathroom,” I said.
    “Well come on,” she said. “It’s time to go home.”
    Mom didn’t cry or yell as we got in the car, but she started driving way too fast. I didn’t dare ask her to slow down.
