 12 – THE BOWL
	
	The sun was starting to go down by the time we finally got the wagon full of root beer and hard tack back to our cave.  Walking up and down the mound so many times had carved a little path into the side, but it was still hard hauling the wagon up between all the prickly bushes.
	When we finally reached the entrance to our cave and shoved all the soda and crackers inside, we realized it wasn’t quite as large as we’d thought, ‘cause there was now barely enough room for the two of us.  So the next day we returned with our shovels and picks and set about making the cave bigger again.  We hadn’t been digging long when Emma gasped.
	“What’s wrong?” I asked.  “You pop a blister again?”  This had caused quite a bit of upset the week before.
	“No,” Emma scoffed.  “I found something.  A bowl.”
      We both crawled out of the cave to look at the bowl in the sunlight.  It was shaped like a pumpkin with a wide stem, ‘cept it was covered with a shiny black glaze.  There was a picture on one side.  I brushed away some of the dirt.
	A drawing of a hand with an eye in the middle of the palm was scratched into the pottery.
	“What does it mean?” asked Emma, pressing her palm up against the one on the bowl.
	I shrugged.  Her hand was exactly the same size as the drawing. 
      “Let’s go ask Jim Dang-It,” said Emma.  “He’s half Indian, isn’t he?”
	So off we went.

      “What you dang kids up to?” Jim asked when we arrived at his cabin.  He was outside cutting branches from low-hanging trees.  
	“We found this,” said Emma, holding up the bowl.  “Can you tell us what it is?”
	Jim Dang-It dropped his handsaw and took the bowl from Emma.  He cradled it in his arms like a baby.  He traced his fingertips over the drawing, then turned the bowl slowly in his hands.  He held the bowl up to his eyes and peeked inside.  He blew a short breath into the bowl, then put it to his ear to listen.  Finally, he put the bowl down on his front stoop and took a step back.  “This dang thing,” he said slowly, “is a sign.”
	“A sign of what?” asked Emma.
	“This bowl was used by the Indians.  When someone died, they filled it with water, so that their loved one would not go thirsty on their journey to the underworld.  The hand and the eye stand for the God who made everything and the God who sees everything.”
	Emma listened wide-eyed.  I was more interested in the fact that this was the first time I’d ever heard Jim say more than a word or two without saying dang.
	“You found this dang bowl on the very anniversary of my wife’s death.”  He shook his head.  “It’s a sign.”
	“A sign of what?” I repeated Emma’s question.
	Jim Dang-It ignored me.  He had Emma hold the bowl as he carefully filled it with water.  Then he ordered me to pick up the green branches he had been cutting and told us both to follow him.
	Jim led us to the top of one of the mounds.  There was a pile of wood already gathered there and a small, folded blanket.  He knelt down and began to build a fire.  
	“What are you doing?” asked Emma politely, still clutching the bowl.
	“My wife died fifteen years ago today.  This is how I show her that I love and miss her.”  Jim closed his eyes and his lips moved briefly in a silent prayer.  
	When the fire was burning well, Jim Dang-It had me throw the green branches on top of it.  Soon the fire began giving off a thick stream of smoke.  Jim unfolded the blanket and held it over the fire.  Every so often, he’d snap it quickly away, sending a clear smoke signal up to the heavens.  
	This went on for a long time.  Finally, Jim Dang-It put down the blanket and nodded at Emma.  She stepped forward and gave him the bowl.  He carefully placed it into the center of the small fire.  The flames hissed as a bit of water sloshed over the side.  Then, in silence, we all walked home.  
	I was mad.  I liked that bowl and wanted to keep it.  Or at least sell it to someone and make a little money for the 4th hunt.  Why did Emma have to give it to Jim Dang-It and his dead wife?  Then I remembered pottery was made under great heat.  Putting it in a little fire like that probably wouldn’t harm it at all.  When the fire had burned out and the bowl had cooled, I’d sneak back and take it.
	But the next day when I returned to the top of the mound, the bowl was gone.  Jim must have gone back to get it.  It wasn’t fair.  Emma found the bowl; if I didn’t get it, then she should.  But then I remembered Jim was half-Indian.  Maybe one of his relatives had made that bowl, a long long time ago.  Maybe it was right for him to keep it after all.





