 15 – FRIED CHICKEN FOR SUPPER

      Before I knew it, it was the first of September and me and Emma were walking through the aisles of Mrs. Pooley’s store, buying pens, paper and ink for school.  Emma picked up a box of chalk and put it in her basket.  
      “Why you buying chalk?” I asked.
      “Mama told me to get some for the teacher.”
      “Teacher don’t need your chalk,” I scoffed.  “She’s got her own.”
       “Dit,” Emma sighed.  “I’m not going to your school.”
      ‘Course she wasn’t.  There weren’t no Negras at my school.  I knew that.  I scuffed my shoes on the dusty floor, when I realized Big Foot was standing at the end of the aisle, watching me.  “Guess you’re going to the Wilson school.”  
      “Yes, I am.”
      “But Elbert ain’t learned nothing there.  He can’t read no better than Pearl.”
      “Mama says I’ll have to make the best of it.”  Emma lowered her voice.  “I don’t really have a choice.”
      I had never really thought about it before, but now that I did, it didn’t seem quite right.  
      Big Foot walked down the aisle towards us, a beer in one hand.  “Only one school around here for a nigger.  And if you ask me, that’s one too many.”
      I looked up at him.  His mouth was drawn up in disgust, as if he had just caught me picking my nose.  Emma stared at the chalk in her basket.  
      “Thought I told you, Dit,” he continued, “stay with your own kind.”  He knocked me on the back of my head with the beer and strolled over to the front counter, his dusty black boots clicking on the wooden floor. 
      “You won’t want to be friends with me once school starts,” Emma said quietly.
      “Yes, I will.”  Sure, Emma sometimes drove me crazy with her worrying ‘bout rabbits and broken windows, but spending time with her was never boring.  ‘Course school was starting soon and Chip was coming back.  Would he look at me the way Big Foot just did?  I started to wonder if Emma was right.
      Late that afternoon, me and Earl were helping Pa.  The corn seed had come in time and was doing pretty well, so now we were working on planting a late crop of turnips in Mama’s garden.  Mama had a big vegetable garden: tomatoes, peas, cucumbers, squash, string beans, carrots, lettuce, and a whole bunch of other green leafy things I didn’t much like to eat.  Mama prided herself on her garden, although it seemed to me that it was us kids who did all the work.  ‘Cept for the canning.  Mama canned so many things we had vegetables all winter long.  I wish she could be like the other mamas and run out sometime after Christmas.  
      To plant the turnips, Pa would dig a little hole with the hoe, then I’d drop in three tiny seeds.  Earl’s job was to cover them up, but he lagged a row or two behind me and Pa.  The half-gallon sack of turnip seeds was heavy on my shoulder.  “Pa?” I asked.
      “Yes, Earl, uh, Raymond, I mean Dit?”  He didn’t look up.
      “Why does Emma gotta go to the Wilson school?  It’s two miles away.”
      “Walking never hurt no one.”  My pa was big on walking.  
      “I know.  But why don’t Negras and whites go to school together?” 
      Pa shrugged.  “Always been that way.”  He continued digging, each hole exactly the same.
      “Don’t seem fair, though.”  I dropped my three turnip seeds.  “’Specially when there’s a perfectly good school just down the road.”
      “When I was a boy,” Pa said, “the Negras ain’t had no school at all.”  
      “But after working in the fields all summer, Bobby’s got skin darker than Elbert,” I pointed out.  “And he don’t go to the Wilson school.”  
      “Skin burnt brown by the sun ain’t the same thing and you know it.  Besides, Elbert’s light skinned cause his grandpa was a white man.”
      “His grandpa married a Negra?”
      Pa stopped digging and wiped his forehead with a handkerchief.   Only did that when he was upset.  I though he was gonna yell at me, but all he said was: “I already said too much.  Let’s just concentrate on planting these turnips.”
      I carefully put three seeds into each hole.  “I still don’t understand why Emma can’t go to school with me.”  
      “Dit just... gosh dang it!”
      I glanced up.  Earl was three or four rows behind us now.  Mama’s chickens were following me, eating the seeds as fast as I put them into the holes.  
      Pa exploded, “I’d like to kill every one of those dang birds!”
      So I picked up a rock and threw it as hard as I could.  It hit a chicken.  The bird fell over dead.  I picked up another rock, but Pa grabbed my arm.  “Maybe you better not kill them all.”
      Pearl ran out then, her apron strings dragging on the ground.  “The chickens got out!  The chickens got out!”
      “Thank you, Pearl,” Pa said quietly.  “We know.”
      That night, we had fried chicken for supper.





