 19 – THE PLANE

      Every day after school, I’d hurry through my chores and head over to the mounds to meet Emma in our cave.  We’d skip stones, or practice throwing baseballs, or collect acorns, or just sit and talk.  Sometimes, she’d paint my picture as I lay on the riverbank and looked at the sky.  My skin would get all prickly when I felt her squinting at me in the sunlight.  Looking at her pictures was strange; they were me, but something was always different.  My hair was the wrong shade of red or my ears were too big.  When I complained to Emma, she just laughed.
      But I didn’t talk about Emma at school, and Chip didn’t ask.  I wanted to be Chip’s friend too.  If he liked me, everyone at school liked me.  We talked baseball and played marbles at recess, and if it wasn’t as much fun as I’d remembered, that didn’t have nothing to do with Emma.  How could it?  She wasn’t even there.
      ‘Cept sometimes it was like she was there, ‘cause I could hear her asking me all sorts of questions.  Why hadn’t I ever noticed that Chip’s teasing sometimes made the little kids cry?  Why did I sometimes join in the teasing?  Why did Chip suddenly want to spend more time with Bobby?  Why did Bobby say yes to everything Chip wanted to do?  Why did Chip and Bobby play with Elbert on the ball field, but wouldn’t speak to him if they ran into him on Mrs. Pooley’s front porch?  Why did Chip cheat at marbles?  Why’d I cheat at marbles?  Why was it okay to like girls when you were a little kid, bad when you were a big kid, and then okay to marry them once you were all grown up?  And why, if Chip was my real good friend, was I so scared to mention Emma?    
      
      Things went along like this for a month or so, with me wondering and why-ing ‘til my head felt like it was screwed on backwards.  Got so I didn’t say much around Chip and Bobby, ‘cause I was so worried one of those “Emma Questions” would come bursting out.  I had my school friends and my after school friends.  Oh they knew about each other – Moundville ain’t that big and people talk – but Chip and Bobby had tired of teasing me.  Least it seemed that way, ‘til the first week in October.  
      Mrs. Seay liked to call people up to the chalkboard to do math problems.  Kept her from getting her hands all covered in chalk.  Mary was standing in front of the whole class, scratching her head.  “My problem was 67 times 43.  I got 469,” she said shuffling her feet.  “But I don’t think that’s right.”
      Mrs. Seay shook her head.  “Can anyone help Mary?”
      I raised my hand.  “You forgot to bring down the zero,” I said, remembering what Emma had told me.  
      Mrs. Seay nodded.  Chip and Bobby laughed at Mary as she sat down, but not me.  I had gotten the same problem wrong the night before.
      Mrs. Seay asked Raymond to come to the board next.  He was in the middle of his problem when a soft buzzing started.  It quickly turned into a loud roar, a roar I couldn’t forget, ‘specially since I’d once mistaken it for a buzzard.
      “It’s a plane!” I said.
      Everyone jumped out of their seats and ran to the window.
      “Students please!” Mrs. Seay cried.  “I know you’ve probably never seen a plane before, but…”  No one was listening to her, so Mrs. Seay finally gave up and hurried over to the window herself.
      The plane was circling, and with each circle it came closer to the ground.  “Is he landing?” asked Raymond.  
      I couldn’t wait no longer.  I jumped out of the window and raced towards the empty lot where we played baseball.  If a pilot were gonna land, that’d be the best place in town.
      Chip, Raymond, and Pearl were at my heels.  “It’s down there, behind those trees,” Chip called out.  
      We pushed through the row of trees and onto the empty lot, but there was nothing there.
      “Did he crash?” asked Pearl.  We all stood still, gasping for breath.
      Uncle Wiggens hobbled onto the field.  “Jesus, Joseph, and General Lee.”  He stood huffing for a moment.  “Big Foot said the pilot landed in the big field out past the railroad yard.”  That was over near the Wilson school.  We took off at a run.  
      Seemed like forever ‘til we burst out of the forest and found the plane sitting in a cow pasture.  The cows were annoyed.  They mooed loudly at the big, silver machine that had interrupted their grazing.  Most of the town was there too: Doc Haley, Mayor Davidson, Mrs. Pooley, Big Foot, Pa and Mama, Emma’s parents, Dr. Griffith, Emma, Elbert, and a bunch of the other kids from the Wilson school.  We were all staring at the plane.
      The pilot stood on the ground, leaning against one wing.  He was a young man, with sweaty brown hair that stuck to his forehead and held a helmet under one arm.  Mayor Davidson walked over to greet him. “Welcome to Moundville.”
      The pilot took Mayor Davidson’s hand and shook it heartily.  “Thank you, sir.”  Then he turned to the crowd.  “Sorry to cause all this commotion, folks.  I’m afraid I ran out of gas.”  Everyone laughed.  The young man grinned.  “Could somebody fetch me a few gallons?”
      Two older boys took off at a run before I could even think about moving.  Emma pushed her way through the crowd to me.  “Did you see it, Dit?” she cried.  “Did you see it land?”
      I shook my head.  “I just got here.”
      “It was beautiful!” Emma continued.  “Just glided in like an eagle.”
      I glanced over at Chip and Bobby and saw them watching me and Emma talking.  They started laughing and even though I was too far away to hear their words, I knew what they were saying.  
      Emma saw them too.  “Something wrong, Dit?”  
      I shook my head.
      Mrs. Seay eventually arrived to tell us that school had been dismissed for the day.  Her hat had blown off her head and her pale cheeks were rosy with excitement.  When the boys came back with the gas, me and Emma pushed our way to the front of the crowd.  We stood beside the wings of the plane, stroking the shiny metal.
      I saw Elbert across the way and waved.  He waved back, ‘til he saw Emma standing next to me.  Then he frowned and turned away.  
      Before I could decide what to make of that, the pilot jumped onto the wing.  He stood up, balanced himself with outstretched arms, and poured the gasoline into a hidden tank.  When he was finished, he jumped down right next to me and Emma.  
      “You like planes?” he asked.  
      “Yes, sir,” Emma answered.  
      “Maybe you’ll get to take a ride someday.”
      Emma’s eyes shone.  “I sure hope so.”
      The pilot winked at us, then Big Foot and Dr. Griffith forced all the children back.  
      “Hold her tight,” the pilot instructed the grown-ups, “’til I’m ready to go.”  
      Big Foot, Dr. Griffith, Mr. Walker, and Pa held onto the wings of the plane.  The pilot spun the propeller and the engine sprang to life with a mighty roar.
      The pilot climbed back into the cockpit, adjusted his controls and gave a thumbs up.  The men let go and scattered.  The plane shot forward, slowly lifting off the ground.  
      It headed straight for a grove of trees.  
      “He’s not gonna make it!” Mrs. Pooley cried.  She covered her eyes.  
      But at the last moment, the plane rose up and just brushed the top of the branches.  
      “What a relief!” sighed Mrs. Seay.  “I was afraid he was going to crash.”
      But as I walked home, I didn’t feel relieved.  I felt worried.  Worried that the days of keeping my friends separate were just about over. 







