 20 – STRIKING OUT

      The day after the plane came to town, I convinced Emma to give baseball another try.  I sent her way out in right field and for the first two innings not a ball came near her.  Then Elman hit a ground ball and Emma actually managed to pick it up and throw it to first.  She grinned like a horse with a mouthful of sugar.  Of course, by that point Elman had already made it to third, but it was a start.
      By the time she got up to bat, however, Emma was no longer smiling.
      “You okay, Emma?” I asked.
      “Dit, I can’t do this.”  Her hands trembled.
      “Sure you can,” I said as I handed her a bat and pushed her towards home plate.  “It’s easy,” I said, though she was holding the bat all wrong.
      Raymond threw the first pitch.  It was a nice, slow ball.  Emma winced and jumped to one side.
      “Strike one,” cried Bobby.  He was catching and Chip was on first.  They hadn’t made no kisses noising or girlfriend jokes at school that day.  Maybe I’d been wrong about them whispering about me and Emma when the plane landed.   
      Raymond threw the next pitch.  It was nice and easy again.  Emma swung, missing the ball by a mile.
      “Strike two!”  Bobby sounded pleased.
      “Emma,” Raymond yelled.  “I’m trying to make it easy for you!”
      Emma bit her lip.  Raymond pitched again.  Any gentler and the ball would have dropped out of the air.  Emma swung so hard, she fell to the ground.
      “Strike three.  You’re out!”  Bobby yelled.
      Emma left the bat on the ground and walked back to the circle of old stumps we used as our dugout.  
      “Don’t worry, Emma,” Pearl said before taking her turn at bat.  “Nobody hits the ball every time.”
      Emma started to cry.
      “You’ll hit it next time,” I said without much conviction, watching the tears drip off her chin onto the dusty ground.
      “Next time,” Emma spat, wiping her nose.  “There’s not going to be a next time.”
      There was a loud crack.  We looked over.  Pearl was sliding into first base.  
      “Even Pearl can do it,” Emma moaned.  “Why do you think I’m so good at reading?  It’s because I can’t do anything else!”
	She was probably right, but I didn’t think it would make her feel better to hear me say it.  I stood watching her cry, unsure what to do.  
	Mitch, the slow boy, lumbered over to her and put his arm around her.  “Don’t cry little Emma,” he said as if talking to a puppy.  “I ain’t no good at reading.”
	Emma hiccupped and gave a little giggle.  Mitch’s face broke into its usual grin.  I felt all churned up inside, like milk before it turns to butter.  Mitch had found a way to comfort Emma, while I just stood there like a fool.
	I was up to bat next.  Raymond was a decent pitcher, but I could usually get a single or maybe even a double off of him.  He threw a fastball, but I knew I could hit it so I started to swing.
	“Girlfriend,” muttered Bobby, just loud enough for me to hear.  
	I was thrown off balance and the ball snapped into his glove.  In a loud voice he called, “Strike one.”
	The next pitch was a curve ball.  Soon as I swung again, Bobby whispered, “Saw you with her.”
	Strike two.  
	I turned to face him this time.  “What’d you say?”
	“Nothing.”
      Bobby exchanged a glance with Chip on first, and I knew it wasn’t just about baseball.  But I didn’t know what to do.  Raymond was waiting and everyone was watching me, so finally, I just stepped back onto home plate.  
      Raymond threw the ball.
      Bobby hissed, “Nigger-lover,” but this time, I hit the ball.  Might even have been a triple, but instead of running I threw down my bat.  
      “Say it again,” I yelled.  “Say it to my face!”
      “Say what?” said Bobby with a smirk.
      I slugged him.  Hit him right in his nose.  He staggered, but didn’t fall over, so I punched him in the stomach.  He jumped me then and even though we were the same size, he was stronger from working all summer.  It might have gone pretty bad for me, ‘cept the one good thing about having so many brothers and sisters is there is always someone to pull you out of a fight.  
      Before I knew what was happening, Raymond and Elman were holding me and Chip had Bobby.  Blood was running down Bobby’s nose and I knew I’d have a black eye.  Emma had disappeared and Pearl was crying and I didn’t know if I was mad at Bobby or Chip or Mitch or Emma or even myself.  I only knew that even though I had hit the ball, I had most definitely struck out.      






