 21 – THE SECRET

      The next day at school Chip asked Mrs. Seay if he could switch desks and go sit with Bobby.  Mrs. Seay gave me a funny look, but I didn’t say nothing and Bobby didn’t have a desk partner, so finally she nodded.  Chip didn’t look at me as he walked back to our desk and collected his things.  We’d sat together since third grade.
      The rest of the day, I could see Mrs. Seay talking, but I couldn’t hear nothing.  The empty space beside me was like a whirlpool, sucking away all my thoughts, getting louder and louder, ‘til all I could hear was its roar. 
      After school, I rushed through my chores.  I didn’t dare show my face at the baseball game, and I wasn’t ready to face Emma, so I decided to pay Elbert a visit.  I was gonna put my problems at school out of my mind and focus on the 4th hunt.  Since my plan with the rabbits hadn’t worked out too well, I was gonna collect me some scrap metal.  With the war going on, Ulman said if you were willing to put in the time collecting old bottle caps and wire, you could be rich.  Maybe I could convince Elbert to ditch the store for an afternoon and help me out.
      But Elbert wasn’t too enthusiastic when I ran the idea by him.  “Haven’t seen you around much, Dit,” he said as he swept off the porch outside of the barbershop.
      “I’ve been busy.”  Felt a little bad about that.  Even if Elbert couldn’t go fishing as much as he’d used to, I could’ve stopped by just to say hello.  Afraid I couldn’t remember that last time I’d done that.
      “Busy with that Emma girl?”  He didn’t look up from his sweeping.
      “She’s all right, Elbert.”  
      “What happened to your eye?”  
      I was annoyed ‘cause I knew he’d heard about it.  “Got in a fight.  Why weren’t you at the game anyway?”
      “Don’t have time for games.  You know I’ve been helping out my pa.  Getting pretty good at cutting hair too.”
      Took a long look at Elbert then.  He was only 15, but suddenly he seemed a lot older.  He was taller, his shoulders were broader and I’ll be a monkey’s uncle if there wasn’t fuzz on his upper lip and chin.  Elbert had gone and grown himself a beard!  
      “You aren’t sweet on her, are you?” he asked.
      “What?”  Elbert had been talking, but I guess the whirlpool was still roaring in my head, ‘cause I hadn’t heard a word.
      “Emma,” he repeated.  “You ain’t sweet on her?”
      “No.”
      “Good.  Whites and Negras shouldn’t be sweet on each other,” Elbert said firmly.  
      “I thought your grandpa was a white man?” I asked.
      Elbert froze like he’d just spied a copperhead, about to strike.  “Who told you that?” he whispered.
      “My pa.”
      Elbert took a step closer.  His mouth screwed up like he’d bit into an old lemon.  “I ain’t supposed to talk about it.”  
      “Come on, Elbert.”
      He rolled the broom handle back and forth in his hands.  “My grandpa was a white man, a big plantation owner.  Took my grandma out in the woods and nine months later she had my pa.”  
      “Without being married or nothing?” I said.  My voice sounded too loud.
      Elbert shook his head.  “And guess who the man was.”
      “Who?”
      “You can’t tell no one.”
      “I won’t.”
      Elbert took a deep breath, then lowered his voice ‘til I could barely hear him.  “Big Foot’s daddy.”
      “Big Foot’s your uncle?”
      “Shhh!”  Elbert glanced around, though we were alone on the street.  “You can’t tell no one or there’ll be trouble.”
      “I promise.” 
      We were both quiet for a while, then Elbert asked, “So you sure you ain’t sweet on that Emma?”
      “She ain’t my girlfriend,” I said firmly.  Then an awful thought occurred to me.  “Are you sweet on her?”
      “No,” said Elbert.  
      “Good.”  I felt more relieved that I expected.  Finally blurted out, “You gonna help me get rich or not?”
      Elbert sighed.  “My pa is over at the church.  Really should ask him if…”
      “Awe, shoot, Elbert.  You know he’ll be busy there all afternoon.”
      Elbert smiled then, the old familiar smile I remembered.  “Sure,” he said.  “Give me a minute to close up and then let’s go find us some scrap metal.”  
      





