 25- KITTENS
  
      Since I was spending most of my time helping Emma with baseball, I wasn’t making much money collecting scrap metal.  Besides, the iron dealer was a cheat.  He was an old white man who put my metal into a basket and weighed it on a large scale.  No matter how much I had collected he would always say, “Ten pounds, three cents.”  But there wasn’t no other buyer, so I took the three cents.  
      Since I wasn’t gonna get my two dollars that way, I started running errands for the neighbors on Sundays.  Mrs. Pooley was my best customer.  One warm November morning I found her sitting in a rocker on her store’s front porch.  “Anything I can do for you today, ma’am?” I asked.
      “Yes Dit, there is.”  Beside her was a large sack, tied at one end with a bit of rope.  She kicked at the sack with her foot.  “I want you to take this sack and throw it in the river.”
      I looked at the sack.  The bag moved and meowed loudly.  “There’re kittens in there.”
      Mrs. Pooley shrugged.  “Maybe there are and maybe there ain’t.  In any case, I don’t want them.  You take them to the river and I’ll give you a nickel.”  
      “No, ma’am,” I said politely.  “I don’t like the idea of drowning no kittens.”
      Mrs. Pooley pouted.  “Now Dit, are you gonna run errands for me or not?”
      “Yes, ma’am.”  
      “Then take this bag and throw it in the river.”
      “Awe, Mrs. Pooley, if it was snakes I wouldn’t mind, but...”
      Mrs. Pooley tssked loudly.  “Bobby’d probably do it.”
      “He’s not half as responsible as me!”
      “Chip then.”
      “I need the money!”  I protested.  I rubbed the back of my head.  My hair was growing in itchy and uneven, but I didn’t dare ask Doc for another haircut.     
      “You drive a hard bargain, Dit,” she said with a smile.  “I’ll make it a dime.”   She reached into her pocket and pressed a coin into my hand.  “Now you take that bag, throw it in the river, and that’s that!”
      I swallowed and picked up the bag.
      A few minutes later I stood on the bank of the Black Warrior, clutching the squirming sack.  The meows got louder and louder, ‘til I couldn’t hear nothing else.  I peeked inside and saw two small kittens looking up at me.  “Meow?” said one of them.  I quick closed the sack.  My hands were sweating as I set the bag carefully down on the ground.
      I shoved my hands into my pocket and pulled out the dime.  It shined like a icicle in the sunlight.  I hid it again in my pocket.  
      Slowly I picked up the bag and turned my back to the river.  I closed my eyes, and with a deep breath, hurled the sack up over my head and into the water.    
      Took off running before I even heard the splash.  Didn’t stop ‘til I reached Emma’s.  She and her family were just coming out the front door.  “You going to church?” I asked.
      “Yes,” said Mrs. Walker.
      “Mind if I come too?”
      Mrs. Walker looked at me funny.  “You already went to church, Dit.  Saw you go with Raymond and the twins this morning.”
      I shrugged.  “Feel like going again.”
      She nodded and I fell into step beside Emma.  “Emma,” I whispered.  “I think I did something bad.”  I quickly told her about Mrs. Pooley and the kittens.  
      “Awe, Dit,” Emma groaned.  “Why’d you do it?”
      “Mrs. Pooley said she wouldn’t hire me no more if I didn’t.”
      “You promised not to kill any more animals.”
      “Not for fun.  But I gotta earn money for the 4th hunt.”  
      Emma shook her head.  “Those poor little kittens.”
      We walked the rest of the way to church without talking.






