 29– A DAY IN JAIL

      The Wilson school was two miles away, so when Mrs. Seay let us out the next day, I sat down under a tree to wait for Emma.  I was planning on taking a little nap when Chip walked up to me.  “Hey, Dit,” he said.  
      “Hi,” I said.  Chip had hardly spoken to me since he’d switched desks.  
      “Haven’t seen you around much,” said Chip.
      “No.”
      “Baseball’s not as fun without our best pitcher.”  Chip grinned, showing off his straight, white teeth.
      I looked at him suspiciously.  “You trying to be nice?”
      “And what if I am?” said Chip.  “We been friends a long time.”
      That was true enough.
      “Come on,” said Chip.  “I want to show you something.”
      “What?”
      “It’s a surprise.” 
 	“Nah.”  I had to wait for Emma.
      “Why not?” asked Chip.
      “I’m meeting someone.”
      “That Negra girl?” Chip asked.
      “No.”  But I think he knew I was lying.
      “Awe, come on, Dit,” said Chip.  “It’ll just take a minute.”
      He was being nice.  Besides, I would probably be back before Emma came. 
      “All right,” I said finally and stood up to follow him.
      Chip led me over to city hall.  It was an old wooden building, not much used, but Chip’s pa had an office there.  The back door was open and we crept into the basement. 
      “What you want to show me?” I asked.  “There’s only spiders and rats here.”
      “You’ll see,” Chip said.  
      I took a few steps forward, almost bumping into Chip when he stopped in front of an old jail cell.  “Here we are,” he announced.  
      The old jail hadn’t been used in years.  Weren’t too many crimes committed in Moundville.  It’s kind of hard to break the law when everybody knows your business.  “Why’d you bring me here?”      
      Bobby stepped out of the darkness.  “We wanted to play a little baseball,” he said.  He glanced at Chip and together they shoved me into the cell.  Before I could scramble to my feet, Bobby slammed the door.
      The floor was dusty and I sneezed.  “Why didn’t you just ask,” I said, wiping my dirty hands on my pants.  “I’d be happy to give you another bloody nose.”
      Bobby snickered.  The sound bounced off the dark walls, ‘til it sounded like a thousand tiny mice squealing at me.
      I stood up and tried the door.  It was locked.  “You’re gonna get in big trouble,” I said, trying to keep my voice calm.  “Go get Big Foot.  He’ll have the key.”
      “We don’t need Big Foot,” Bobby said.
      “Then how you gonna get me out?”
      Chip pulled out a key on a string around his neck.  “My dad’s the mayor.”
      Of course.  Chip would have it all planned out.  “Fine,” I said.  “You had your joke.  Now let me out.”
      “Not ‘til you say it,” Bobby growled.  
      “Say what?” I taunted.  “How much I want to beat you up again?”
      “You gotta admit you love that nigger girl,” said Chip.
      “I do not!”
      “Then we won’t let you out,” said Bobby.  Chip tucked the key back under his shirt.  
      It was probably only an hour or so, but it seemed like forever.  Bobby and Chip sat on the stairs, watching me.  I crossed my arms and stared back at them.  I wasn’t gonna speak first.  
      “Come on, Dit,” Chip said finally.  “It’s getting cold down here.”
      “I ain’t gonna say it.”  I wasn’t cold.  I was steaming.  My ‘best friend’ had locked me in a jail cell.  
      “Then we’ll let the rats eat your bones,” said Bobby, sounding a little tired.
      We sat in silence a while longer.  There were rats and I watched a fat one make a nest in the corner of the cell.  “I got to get home,” I said finally.  “It’s past time for chores.”
      “You hang out with her sometimes, right?” asked Chip.  Guess he was tiring of the game.
      “Yes.”
      “Say she’s your very best friend and we’ll let you out.”
      I considered this.  I didn’t like admitting this, but I didn’t like being locked in a cell even more.  “All right.  Emma’s my very best friend.”
      Bobby snickered again.  But this time it sounded hollow.    
      Chip took the key from around his neck and shrugged.  “Anyway, I got to get the key back before my dad notices.”
      Chip unlocked the door.  I stepped out of the cell and swung at him.  Didn’t even realize how angry I was at him ‘til my fist was in the air.  I understood why Bobby was upset – I’d beat him up in front of everyone.  But Chip was my friend.  We’d pulled a hundred tricks like this together.  And the truth was, ‘til now, I’d never given a thought to what it was like to be the one on the other side.  
      My fist hit Chip square in the jaw.  He fell to the ground.  Bobby bent down to help him.  I ran up the stairs and didn’t look back.
      
      That night, I didn’t go over to Emma’s.  Me and Pearl sat at the dining room table doing our homework.  About a quarter to eight, there was a knock at our door.  I didn’t move.  There was another knock.  Finally, Pearl slid off her chair and went to answer it.
      She returned a moment later with Emma.  “Where were you today?” Emma asked.
      I wanted to tell her about Chip and Bobby, felt the words building up like a pressure in my chest.  But I didn’t know what to say.  Me and Chip had been friends for just about forever and suddenly everything had changed.  “I forgot,” I lied.  “I’m sorry.”  
      “Oh, it’s all right,” she said.  “I just introduced myself to Mrs. Seay.”  She put a huge book down on the table.
      “What’s that?” I asked.
      Emma smiled.  “I told her I thought she was wrong about the war.  She pulled out this old book and told me if I read the whole thing and wrote an essay on it, she’d discuss the issue with me further.”
      Pearl laughed.  “She thought you wouldn’t do it!”
      “No.”  Emma grinned, fire sparkling in her brown eyes.  “She thought I couldn’t read!”
      ‘Course Emma started on the book that very night.  First, she read the entire table of contents.  Out loud.  Me and Pearl ‘bout fell asleep, but Emma said it was important to know where the book was going.  I said that book was too heavy to go anywhere.  Emma rolled her eyes and turned the page to 