 47 – DRIVING TO SELMA

      Pa agreed to let us take his car.  Made me feel real proud.  He wanted to drive Mr. Walker himself, but Mama wouldn’t let him since he still had a fever.  It was decided that Emma would go with me, so in case something happened at least there’d be three of us.  Mrs. Walker wanted to go too, but she had the two funerals the next day and Mama still wasn’t feeling that well herself.
      We tucked Mr. Walker into the backseat of the car and covered him with blankets.  Emma sat in the front and I was behind the steering wheel.  Mrs. Walker handed us a basket of food, told us for the thousandth time to be careful, and we drove off.
      It was awful dark.  Vines hung like thick snakes on the trees.  It was the coldest April anyone could remember.  An icy rain fell, coating the leaves and branches so that they glimmered in the moonlight.  Mrs. Walker had packed us a big thermos of strong coffee.  Made me feel real grown-up every time Emma poured me a dark black cup.  Mr. Walker dozed in the back seat.  Every once in a while, a tree branch gave way with a large crack and fell to the ground.  ‘Cept for the moon and the car’s lights, it was as black as the belly of an eel.
      Me and Emma shivered in the front seat.  We were wrapped in blankets, but it was so cold, I could see my breath as I drove.  Another tree branch fell under the weight of the ice and me and Emma both jumped.  I had to drive at a snail’s pace.  And the truth was, I’d never driven at night before.  
      Emma groaned.  “I just thought of something.” 
      “What?” I asked.
      “If you hadn’t offered to drive, Daddy wouldn’t have been able to get to the exam.”
      “And?” 
      “My family would’ve had no choice but to stay in Moundville.”
      “Oh.”  I hadn’t thought of that.  Would I ever learn just to keep my dang mouth shut?  
      We drove in silence for a while longer.  Suddenly, there was a loud pop.  I thought it was another tree branch, ‘til I saw the white smoke billowing out from under the hood.  
      “What’d you do?” asked Emma.
      “Nothing!”
      Of course ‘cause I was looking at the smoke, I didn’t see the ice.  Next thing I knew, I was pointing the steering wheel straight and the car was turning, turning, ‘til we were sliding sideways down the road.  Did exactly what Dr. Griffith told me not to do then – stamped down on those brakes hard as could be.  
      That did what Dr. Griffith had warned me it would do – set the car off spinning faster than one of baby Robert’s tops.  Emma screamed and gripped the door.  Mr. Walker woke up with a snort, yelling “Stop the car, stop the car,” over and over, like that was gonna help.  I started praying, but the only prayer that came to mind was “Jesus, Joseph and General Lee” and I didn’t think Emma would like that too much, seeing how Lee was a Southern general, so I just said it in my head.  I was pretty sure we were all gonna die, so it didn’t much matter what I did anyway.   
      The car spun around at least twice, ‘til we were sliding down the road backwards.  Finally I decided to try the brakes again, and I guess we were off the ice, because they worked this time.  Sort of.  We skidded off the road and only ran into a small tree, thanks to my steering while looking backwards over my shoulder.  Well, if I’m being real honest, I think I accidentally steered us into the tree, but the important thing was the car was stopped and none of us was dead.
	I think Mr. Walker might still have had a touch of fever, ‘cause he started crying, “Praise the Lord,” over and over again, and it was just about as annoying as yelling, “Stop the car.” Emma finally told her pa to hush and then I knew he really was sick, because he listened to her.  
	That’s when I got scared.  We were two children out alone in the woods with a delirious adult and a broken down car.   
	“What happened?” said Emma.
      “Don’t know,” I said.
      We slid out of the car and I opened the hood.  Didn’t know what I was looking at for a moment, but then everything Dr. Griffith told me slowly started to come back.  I pointed, “So cold the water must’ve froze in the radiator.  Pressure blew the top right off.”  
      Emma was impressed.  I knew she was, ‘cause she opened her mouth like a fish, but couldn’t get nothing out, just nodded and closed her lips again.  
      “Gotta get to Selma,” Mr. Walker moaned from the back of the car.
      “So what do we do now?” asked Emma.
      I checked the radiator again.  It was about dry.  “We need to go find some water.”
      So me and Emma tramped off through the woods.  The fog was so thick it was like stepping through a rain cloud.  We stayed close to one another.  I carried the cup from the thermos.  
      “Emma?” I asked.
      “Yes?”
      “Want me to tell your daddy we couldn’t find a stream?” 
      Emma shook her head.  “He wouldn’t believe you.”
      Right then, I think he would’ve believed me if I’d said I was Abraham Lincoln.  But I didn’t want to scare Emma.  We pushed through some underbrush and stood on the edge of a small creek.  The moonlight sparkled on the water.  I leaned over to fill the cup.  
      “Want me to have an accident?” I asked, looking at Emma’s reflection in the water.  
      “What?”
      “If I did, we wouldn’t get there in time,” I said quietly.
      “But you’d get in trouble with your pa for wrecking his car.”
      I shrugged.  “I don’t care.”  
      “You’d do that for me?”  Emma’s eyes were wide.
      “Yeah.”  I stood clutching the freezing cup.  
      Emma smiled.  “I don’t want you to do that, Dit.”  
      “Do you want to leave Moundville?”
      Emma shook her head.  “You’re the best friend I’ve ever had.”  Then she kissed me on the cheek.  Before I could move, she dashed up the hill and disappeared into the fog.  I touched my cheek and went to follow her.  
      Once we added the water to the radiator, the car started up just fine.  Steam still trickled from the hood, but the engine sounded strong.  I had to take it real slow on the icy patches, but there were stretches of dry road that were okay.  Mr. Walker went back to sleep.  I kept glancing at Emma, but she wouldn’t meet my eye.		





