 5 – ELBERT AND DOC HALEY

      In Moundville all the little kids ran together in the street playing kick-the-can, white and colored alike.  The big kids played ball.  Pa sometimes helped a colored neighbor with their fence and stayed for supper, and there was an old Negra woman Mama liked to quilt with now and then.  There were no Negras at our church or school, but everybody sat in the rocking chairs on Mrs. Pooley’s front porch.  Only if all the chairs were taken and Big Foot or Mayor Davidson came by, would one of the Negras jump up and lean against the railing instead.  
      My friend Elbert’s pa was called Doc Haley, even though he was a barber, not a doctor.  His shop was right on Main Street.  All the men in town went to Doc Haley’s shop, whites and Negras.  There were two rooms – the front room where Doc cut hair and the back room where he and Elbert slept.  The front room had a large barber chair, a shelf full of creams and tonics, a water basin, and a small stove and table in the back corner where Doc and Elbert did their cooking.  Elbert’s mama had died when he was little, so Doc had gotten as good at frying fish as he was at giving haircuts.
      About a week after Emma had arrived, I stopped by the shop to see Elbert.  He was sitting in the barber chair, while his father cut his hair.  Elbert’s hair was just as dark as Emma’s, but his skin was a shade or two lighter.  
      “Sure,” Elbert said when I asked if he wanted to go fishing.  He moved to jump up from the chair, but Doc Haley put a hand on his shoulder.
      “Just a minute, Elbert,” Doc said.  “You remember that talk we had about this summer?”
      “Yes, Pa,” said Elbert.  He frowned.  “Do we have to start right now?”
      Doc Haley smiled.  “No, I guess we don’t.  Go ahead.  But tomorrow, we’ll get to work.”
      
      When me and Elbert were settled on the bank of the Black Warrior with our fishing rods, I asked him what Doc had been talking about.  
      “Pa’s gonna teach me how to give shaves and cut hair this summer,” Elbert explained.  “Says he ain’t gonna live forever and the store’ll be mine someday.”
      Back before I was born, Doc had been one of my pa’s sharecroppers.  We usually had four or five families working on our land.  Instead of paying Pa money to use the land, they promised to give him part of their crops.  Some people had a hard time getting sharecroppers because of the way they treated them, but Pa was honest and never had no trouble dividing up the profits at the end of each year.
      Doc Haley had finally decided he was tired of sharecropping and he was gonna get himself some land of his own.  Problem was, no one wanted to sell.  He finally convinced my pa to give him a bit of land and some tools on credit.  Pa always admired gumption.  By the end of one year, Doc Haley had earned enough to pay Pa back every penny he owed him.  “I ain’t never seen a man work so hard,” Pa said whenever he told the story.  They became friends after that.  Couple of years later, Doc Haley gave up farming and bought the barbershop.
      “That’s great,” I said to Elbert, though I was a little jealous.  My pa wasn’t treating me like a man.
      “Yeah.”  Elbert reeled in his line and threw it out again without looking at me.  “’Cept it means I won’t have as much time for fooling around.  So I expect this’ll be our last fishing trip for a while.”
      “Oh.”  I knew it.  Just like Elman.  
      “Sorry, Dit.”
      I shrugged like I didn’t mind.  But I did.  Elbert was patient and didn’t talk much either.  These two things together made him just about the perfect fishing partner.  Inside, I cursed Emma again for being a girl.  It was gonna be one lonely summer.  
      That afternoon I caught me four large catfish, and Elbert got only one.  I was teasing him something awful as we walked back to his pa’s shop.  I usually traded fish for a trim and it was about time for a haircut.  Doc Haley had just invited me to stay for dinner, when the bells on the front door jingled.  We all looked up and saw Big Foot standing in the doorway.  
      “Afternoon, Mr. Big Foot, sir,” said Doc Haley.  “Would you like a haircut?”
      “Nope.”  Big Foot looked around the room.  Drinking had turned his nose permanently red, but his hair was still a nice shade of brown, even if it was a little uneven.  I wondered if he cut it himself.  
      “How about a shave and a shoe shine?”  Doc Haley was a tall man, with short grey hair and a clean-shaven face.  But today, he looked shorter than usual.
      “No.”  Big Foot casually let his hand rest on the pistol on his belt.
      “Then what can I do for you?”  Doc’s low voice cracked a little.
      Big Foot picked up a bottle of hair tonic from the shelf.
       “That’s 25 cents, sir,” said Doc brightly.  “Right good tonic.  Want me to ring it up for you?”
      Big Foot just put that bottle of tonic in his pocket and walked right out of the store.  I probably seen the same thing happen ten times before, but for some reason, I noticed that day.
      “Why you let Big Foot steal from you?” I asked.
        Doc Haley ignored me, ‘til Big Foot turned the corner out of sight.  
      “Well Dit, there is some things in life that are worth making a stink over,” said Doc, as he put the fish in a pan on the stove.  “But a bottle of hair tonic ain’t one of them.”






