 51 – THE KEYS

      We snuck down Main Street, heading towards Mrs. Pooley’s store.  The gallows loomed in front of city hall.  All week Mr. Fulton, had worked on them, singing as he sawed and hammered.  Emma stopped in front of the gallows and looked up at the wooden structure.
      “Emma,” I asked quietly, “freeing Doc is breaking the law, ain’t it?”
      “Yes.”  
      “Ain’t that wrong?”
      “I don’t know.”  Emma thought for a moment.  “Some people helped slaves escape before the war.  They were breaking the law, but I don’t think they were wrong.”
      I stared at Emma.  I couldn’t imagine her a slave.  She was too smart.  She was too beautiful.  Was it possible that in another time and place, that wouldn’t have made a difference?
      I leaned over and kissed her on the cheek.
      “Don’t do that, Dit,” she said.
      “Why not?  You kissed me.”
      “I shouldn’t have.”
      I didn’t think so, but said nothing.  Even Emma was wrong once in a while.   
      “We’d better keep moving,” Emma said finally.
      We reached Mrs. Pooley’s front porch.  She lived in a couple of rooms above the store.  There weren’t any lights burning so I figured we had a chance of pulling this off.  Soon as I thought that, Emma brushed past one of the rockers, causing it to squeak.  I held my breath, ‘til the sound faded into the night.  
      We tried the front door, a large oak slab with a small window.  It was locked.  I pulled out my pocketknife and fiddled with the lock.  Nothing happened.
      “Stand back, Dit,” said Emma.
      I took a step away from the door.  Emma held a large stone.
      “Emma, no!”
      But she threw the stone anyway.  It crashed through the front window.  I thought we were caught for sure, but no one came by to see about the noise.  Guess the old woman was a heavy sleeper.  Either that or she’d had a couple of nightcaps.  
      I carefully reached through the broken glass and unlocked the door.
      Soon as we were inside Mrs. Pooley’s store, I lit my candle.  It flickered, creating strange shadows as we looked down the aisles.  I had been through those aisles a thousand times in the daylight, but at night they seemed as strange as a Chinese market.
      “Where do you think the keys are?” asked Emma. 
      “By the register?” I suggested.
      Sure enough, right by the front counter there was a ring of keys hanging on a nail.  Emma reached up and took them down.  She spread the silvery keys out in a fan over her fingers.  
      “Which one is it?” she whispered.
      “I don’t know.”
      “We’ll have to take them all.”
      “Think we’ll have time to bring ‘em back before daybreak?”
      “I don’t...”
      The front door opened.  A figure stood in the doorway, huge and shining in the starlight.  “I saw you go in,” growled a deep voice.  “Come on out!”  
      For a minute I thought it was Big Foot, come back from the dead.  Me and Emma slowly crept forward.  By the light of the candle, we saw Mrs. Pooley in the doorway.  “What are you doing?” she asked.
      I couldn’t think of nothing to say.
      Mrs. Pooley tried to snatch the ring of keys from Emma, but she stepped back.  “We need the key to let Doc Haley out of jail.” 
      Mrs. Pooley ripped the keys from Emma’s hands.
      “You have to help us,” Emma pleaded.
      “Don’t you tell me what to do.  I’m an old woman.  I do as I like.”  She hung the keys back on their nail, then turned her gaze back to us.  “Come with me.”







