 6 – THE BUZZARD

      Emma made good on her promise not to leave her front porch.  She was just about always sitting in an old rocking chair, swaying back and forth and reading a book.  The only book we owned was the family Bible, but every few days Emma had a new book that was a different color or thickness.  Left one on her front step once.  I crept over and snuck a peak.  Treasure Island by someone called Robert Louis Stevenson.  Sounded kind of promising, but when I opened it up, it was just words, words, words and no pictures.  I left it on the stoop. 
      When Emma wasn’t reading, she was watching me.  Which was awful annoying.  She never said nothing, though, so I had almost gotten used to it, ‘til one day she called out, “Why are you carrying that gun?”
      I turned around.  I had my shotgun slung over my shoulder and was heading for the path into the woods.  “Going hunting,” I said.  “I’ve gotta practice for the 4th hunt.”  
      “The 4th of July was last week.”
      “I know that.”  I kept walking.  That girl must have thought I was as stupid as a pumpkin.  She’d seen me at the town celebration.  I knew ‘cause I caught her watching me give baby Robert and Lois a ride in my wagon, and I’d seen her watching the fireworks from the post office stoop.  She’d looked kind of lonely.
      Emma put her book aside and scrambled down her steps.  “So what’s the 4th hunt?”  She fell in step beside me, following me down the shaded path.  I didn’t have no choice but to answer.
      “Every year on the 4th of July, all the best hunters meet in front of Mrs. Pooley’s store.  They each pay $2 to enter the contest.  Then everyone has eight hours to go out and shoot all the squirrels, rabbits, and birds they can.  The person who brings back the most game wins all the money.  I’m gonna win next year.”  
      “Why do you want to win a stupid contest like that?” asked Emma.  
      “It’s not stupid.  My pa won the hunt twice when I was little and Ulman once came in third.”  
      “Who won this year?”
      “Mr. Fulton, the town carpenter.  Big Foot came in second and he was real mad.”
      Pa always talked about how winning the hunt had really been something.  I was sure I was gonna win next year.  Everyone said I had the best aim of anyone this side of the Mississippi.  Give me a baseball, a stone, or a shotgun – I could hit anything.  If I could only find enough money to enter, my pa wouldn’t call me, “Della, Ollie, Ulman, Elman, Raymond, uh, I mean Dit” ever again.  
      “So why are you practicing now if the contest is already over?”
      “I’m gonna enter next year.  Gotta be at least 13.” 
      “And where are you going to get two whole dollars?” asked Emma.
      I hadn’t quite figured that out myself.  We went over a small bridge and walked along the river for a while.  The woods were thick here, shading us from the hot July sun.
      “You haven’t shot anything yet,” Emma broke the silence.
      “That’s ‘cause I ain’t seen no rabbits.  I can kill any bird with my flip-it.”  At that moment, a huge low-flying buzzard appeared down river. 
      “Couldn’t kill that buzzard,” said Emma.  
      The buzzard flew in lazy circles, eying a dead squirrel on the path about twenty feet in front of us.  It came closer and closer, ‘til the bird hovered right above the squirrel.
      I rolled my eyes.  “Don’t you know nothing?  There’s a big fine if you kill a buzzard.  You could even go to jail.”  Wasn’t quite sure if this was true.  But Raymond said Elman knew someone whose brother’s cousin had gone to jail for shooting a buzzard.  So I wasn’t taking no chances. 
      “I knew you wouldn’t do it,” said Emma.
      I raised the gun to my shoulder and before I could think about that fine, I’d fired.  The kickback of the weapon knocked me to the ground.
      “Why’d you do that!” Emma yelled. 
      “You dared me.”
      The buzzard started flapping its wings wildly.  I’d hit its right wing and it sank to the ground.
      Emma pulled me up.   The buzzard was blocking our path forward, so we turned and started to hurry back the way we had come.  But an ugly switching noise seemed to follow us.  I looked back.
      With a last burst of strength, the buzzard had forced itself back into the air.  It flew right over our heads, so low I could feel its dirty feathers brush my forehead.  Emma shrieked and the buzzard fell to the ground, not five feet from where we were standing.
      The bird lay still, a pile of wrinkled feathers and skin.
      “Is it dead?” Emma whispered.
      I didn’t know, but now it was blocking our path home.  I took a step towards it.  The bird jumped up and let out a terrible scream.  
      Now I’m no coward, but you got to understand, a buzzard’s got a beak on him like the jaws of a bear.  So I did what any sensible person would do - ran as fast as I could in the opposite direction.  Emma was right behind me.  The gun slapped at my leg, but I didn’t stop.  Took us a quite a while to get home, ‘cause we had to circle the long way round through the broom sage patch where the rabbits like to run.  Saw a ton of rabbits too, but I didn’t feel like hunting anymore.  Emma glanced at the shotgun once, but didn’t say a word.
      When we finally made it back, Mama and Mrs. Walker were sewing in the lot between our houses.  “Where have you two been?” Mama asked.
      Before I could think up a good lie, something started roaring, like a lion way off in the distance.  
      Mama looked up.  “What’s that?”
      The sound came from the sky.  Far off, we could see a black dot coming towards us.
      I whispered to Emma, “Think it’s the buzzard?”
      But it wasn’t.  The noise got louder and louder.  Finally, Mrs. Walker put down her sewing and said, “It’s an airplane.”
      A moment later, a small single-engine plane flew directly over us.  I knew what a plane was, of course.  We had all read about it in the paper.  But as far as I knew, no one in Moundville had ever seen one.  ‘Til now.  It was like magic – a metal box, soaring overhead like an eagle.  The plane was flying so low, we could see the pilot lean over and wave at us.  
      Emma laughed and waved back.  I was just relieved it wasn’t the buzzard.




