2
See It Now
On Monday I was still feeling out of sorts. I slept through my alarm and was late for my paper route. I barely got it done in time, and I didn’t even have a second to grab a banana as I ran for the bus.
    “Late again, Tommy,” Lizzie teased, as I climbed onto the bus, my heart pounding like a galloping horse.
    “Shut up, Lizard-Face,” I said.
    Lizzie pouted. “Don’t call me Lizard-Face,” she said. “My name is Elizabeth.”
    “No one has ever called you that since you were two, Lizzie,” I said, sliding into the seat next to Eddie. “Besides, I wasn’t referring to your name.”
    She turned back in her seat to face us. “Then why—”
    “Well, if you took a pen and connected all the dots . . .” I pantomimed drawing a line from one freckle to another, all over Lizzie’s face.
    Eddie laughed. “Yeah, exactly like a lizard!”
    Lizzie gasped in indignation and turned as red as her hair. 
    Behind Eddie and me, Peter laughed. It irked me. He should be defending his sister. That’s what I’d do if someone were teasing Mary Lou.
    “You think it’s funny, Peter?” I asked, twisting around to face him.
    “Yeah.” He chuckled.
    “I wouldn’t laugh if I had so much pepper on my face,” I said. “Ah-choo!”
    “Stop it,” Peter said.
    “Or . . .” I picked up my imaginary pen and started drawing again. I nudged Eddie. “What do you think, Eddie? Monkey-Head?”
    “Oh yeah,” Eddie agreed. “I can see the big ears and the tail right there.” He pointed.
    “Your freckles do kind of look like a monkey,” Luke said.
    “Luke!” Peter fumed.
    “I’m just saying . . .”
    “Luke doesn’t have any freckles,” I pointed out. “Maybe Peter’ll give you a few.”
    “Nah,” Luke said. “I like my face how it is.”
    I don’t know what made me say it, but I added, “And you like your arm too?”
    Luke turned red, then as pale as a polar bear. His bad arm from the polio hung at his side. He looked out the window, pretending his eyes weren’t filling with tears.
    “You’re an idiot,” Peter said, and turned his body in the seat so he couldn’t see me anymore.
    I sat back down. My heart was beating quickly again, even though I’d recovered from the bike ride. I wiped my palms on my pant legs and they left two little stains of sweat.
    “What’s got into you?” asked Eddie.
    “I don’t know,” I said. We didn’t tease people about polio. That was off-limits. I wasn’t sure why I had crossed that line.
    Eddie sighed. “Didn’t see you at the Tivoli this weekend.”
    “Went fishing with my dad,” I said. Then, grateful to change the subject, I added, “Why didn’t you come?”
    Eddie looked sick, kind of green, liked he’d swallowed a rotten sardine. “Don’t tell anyone.”
    “’Course not!”
    “My dad lost his job.”
    “What? Why?”
    Eddie shook his head. “Dad said the boss had it in for him. But Mom said he was drinking at work.”
    “Sorry.”
    Eddie shrugged. “Next-door neighbor needed his basement painted. So I spent all Sunday doing that. Earned a few extra dollars for my mom.” He looked at me. “Think I could get a paper route like you?”
    “Huh.” I snorted. “You don’t want one.”
    But as we filed off the bus and into Mass, I remembered how good it felt to hand over my wages every other week to Mom. For a minute or two, when I gave her the money, she looked at me like she actually liked me. [SB115]Maybe the paper route wasn’t such a bad thing after all.
At recess, Peter and Luke convinced Eddie to play marbles with them. They didn’t say a word to me, and after how I’d acted on the bus, I didn’t think I could ask to join them. So I walked around like I didn’t care, from one end of the school yard to the other. Little Skinny was sitting under the elm tree, doing his homework or something. He was concentrating really hard, I guess, so I snuck up on him and announced, “You’re the one!”
    Little Skinny jumped and his papers flew everywhere.
    I leaned over and picked one up.
    “Don’t touch that!” he snapped[CE116].
    I’d never heard him speak so forcefully. So of course that made me want to look at the paper instead of just handing it back to him. It wasn’t a school assignment. The paper was different and it was mimeographed, just like the weekly church bulletin my mother received.
    “Give it back!” he screamed, and then he started crying and wailing, like I was hitting him.
    The Adventures of Cowboy Sam was written across the top, as if it were the first page of a story. “Did you write this?” I asked. I was trying to make it sound like I thought it was really stupid, but I couldn’t hide my admiration. I struggled to write a paragraph in school—and he’d practically written a whole book. Not that it mattered how I said it. Little Skinny was screaming so loud, you’d have thought he was being scalped. He couldn’t hear a thing.
    Sister Ann came running toward us. Little Skinny was practically hysterical now, tears running down his face, yelling “Give it back!” over and over again. He was crying so hard you could barely understand the words.
    “Tommy, what’s going on?” asked Sister Ann.
    “I don’t know,” I said. “There was a big gust of wind and his papers blew away. And I came to help him pick them up and he just started . . .” I waved my hand at him.
    Sister Ann looked at me, uncertain what to do.
    Suddenly Little Skinny grabbed the papers from my hands.
    “Samuel!” said Sister Ann sternly, in her no-nonsense voice, the one she used with the first graders. “That’s not how we treat our friends. Apologize.”
    Little Skinny sniffled.
    “Oh, that's okay—” I started.
    “Yes, it is,” said Sister Ann. She turned to Little Skinny. “Tommy was trying to help you clean up. You grabbed that from him. You need to apologize.”
    “Sorry,” whispered Little Skinny. His whole face was red and flushed, the same color as his scar.
    Me too, I wanted to say. It didn't seem fair that Sister Ann was scowling him, when he hadn't done a thing. But I couldn’t get the words out.
That Friday, Dad and I were watching TV in the living room. Mom had gone to bed early, and we’d just had sandwiches for dinner so there weren’t many dishes. I was sewing a button back on one of my school shirts, badly, but I’d rather do it myself than risk Mom asking me why I’d been so careless.
    Douglas Edwards with the News [CE117]came on. We watched the show most nights at 6:30. “Good evening everyone, coast to coast,” Mr. Edwards intoned seriously.
    I didn’t pay much attention. At least not until I heard a name I recognized: Radulovich. I looked up at Mr. Edwards.
    “U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Milo Radulovich was reinstated today[CE118], as a direct result of the program done by our very own Edward R. Murrow on October 20, [CE119]just one month ago.” Murrow was a TV newsman, so famous even I had heard of him.
    Dad sat rigid next to me. I could tell he was paying attention because he didn’t move a muscle.
    Apparently, Radulovich had been featured on this show called See It Now[CE120]. They played a clip from it. Radulovich was a young man with dark hair. "If I am being judged by my relatives," he said, "are my children going to be asked to denounce me?”[SB122]
    “He got his job back?” I asked Dad.
    “Shhh,” he hissed, his eyes fixed on the program.
    A clip of Edward R. Murrow came on again then. His voice was deep and gravelly. He was talking about how no one had seen the evidence against Radulovich. “Was it hearsay, rumor, gossip, slander, or hard, ascertainable facts that could be backed by credible witnesses? We do not know.”[CE123]
    “Murrow investigated,” I said to my dad. “And he got Radulovich his job back!”
    Dad got up and turned off the TV. He walked out of the room without saying another word.
    For a moment, I felt strangely happy. Someone had looked for the truth and it had made a difference. My dad was wrong. And if Dad was wrong about Radulovich, maybe he was wrong about Mrs. Glazov too. Maybe she really was the communist.
    And then I started worrying again. Because even if I could get my hands on that book, I wasn't sure what I should do with it. All that night, as I tried to fall asleep, I kept hearing Mr. Murrow’s voice repeating: “We do not know. We do not know.”
