8
Christmas
On Christmas Eve we got a ride to church with Eddie and his parents. Mr. and Mrs. Sullivan kept snipping at each other in the car, but we all pretended not to notice. Mom wasn’t with us because she’d gone to pick up Mary Lou from the hospital and it had taken longer than she'd expected. She'd called and told us to go on without her. I held Susie and Pinky sat in Dad’s lap.
    When we stepped inside the church, the first thing I saw was the huge Christmas tree, twice as big as the one we’d picked out, and dozens of red poinsettias. There were also two smaller trees. They were decorated with nothing more than blue lights that shone like moonlight on water in the dim church.
    The second thing I noticed was Lizzie Johnson in a green-and-red-plaid dress that clashed with her hair. She looked so pretty. I walked over and said hi. She crossed her arms, muttered an insincere “Merry Christmas” and turned her back on me. But at least she was speaking to me.
    We sat down in our pew and the service started. After a while, Pinky slumped against me, half asleep. Little Skinny and Mr. McKenzie were there too. I cringed as I looked at Little Skinny, sinking down lower in my pew, hoping he hadn’t told his dad about the stockings. Pinky woke up for the Christmas carols at the end—and the very last one was “Hark! The Herald Angels Sing.” That was a good sign. I wondered if Mary Lou would really be there when we got home.
    It was snowing as we all filed outside, solemn yet joyous. Clanking chains on the car tires rang through the night. If I’d been a little younger, I might have believed Mr. Sullivan’s story that they were the bells on Santa’s sleigh. I was pretty sure that Pinky did.
    When we pulled up to our house, I could see our car in the driveway. I ran inside, and there, in the living room, sitting in an armchair, was my sister.
    Mary Lou was talking to my mother, who was sitting next to her on the couch. There were no lights on, only a few candles on the mantel. The tree was still in the garage, waiting to be decorated by my mother. When Mary Lou turned to me, she seemed to glow, like the trees at church, her long brown hair falling loose about her head, the candlelight making her brown eyes shine. She didn’t really look like my sister. She looked like an angel.
    “Tommy,” she said, and smiled.
    Pinky beat me to her. She threw her arms around her, and though she winced, Mary Lou hugged her back. I could just see her bandaged legs peeking out from under her long skirt. It was my turn then, and I walked over and took her hand in mine. For the first time since burning the trash all those weeks ago, I didn’t have to feel guilty. Mary Lou was home and everything was going to be okay.
    “I’m so glad I got to come home for Christmas,” Mary Lou said.
    “Yeah,” I said. “Me too.”
Out of habit, I woke up at 4:30 the next morning even though I didn’t have to deliver the papers until 8:30 on Christmas Day. I lay in bed for a while, trying to go back to sleep, but I was too excited. Finally, I got up and went into the living room.
    The tree looked beautiful. There were long strings of multicolored lights and candle-shaped bulbs with boiling alcohol inside, candy canes and ornaments and lots and lots of tinsel. The paper garland Mary Lou and I had made was draped across the mantel. Gifts were scattered around [CE137]the tree, their ribbons sparkling.
    Mom walked into the room then, drinking a cup of coffee. “Morning, Tommy,” she said.
    “Morning, Mom,” I said. “You did an amazing job.”
    “You like it?” She’d tied her dark hair back with a scarf. It made her look young, like a little girl.
    “It’s perfect,” I said.
    “It is, isn’t it?” She sighed.
    I thought back to the great time we’d had eating Thanksgiving dinner. My accordion was at Mrs. Glazov’s. I’d have to get it later, maybe play a few polkas and we could all dance in the living room again. Maybe it would be just like old times.
    Mom yawned.
    “Did you get any sleep?” I asked.
    “No,” she said. “But I don’t like to sleep on Christmas. It’s my favorite holiday. I don’t want to miss one single moment.”
    I knew just what she meant.
    She smiled at me, and we stood there together, looking at the tree for a long time. Finally, Mom said, “Go back to sleep, Tommy. Dad won’t have breakfast ready until after six.”
    So I did. The house smelled like sausage links and pancakes when I woke up a second time. Everyone else was already gathered in the kitchen. Pinky was bouncing in her chair at the breakfast table. “Hurry, Tommy,” she said. “Mommy says no presents until we eat.”
    I gobbled down that food so fast, I barely tasted it. Soon as we were done, it was present time. We tore into them, bows and paper flying in the air. Maybe not as many presents as in years past, but there was a new doll for Pinky, a book for Mary Lou, a model airplane for me and a new fishing lure for Dad’s collection.
    When our boxes were finally opened, Dad cleared his throat. “Tommy and I have a special surprise for Mom.”
    My mother smiled.
    “What is it, Tommy? What is it?” begged Pinky.
    I pulled out Mom’s package from where I’d hidden it under the couch and handed it to her. She tore the paper open.
    “Is this a new dress?” She gasped, her eyes shiny and bright, her face as excited as Pinky’s.
    I nodded. “I thought you’d like the green. Dad saved the money and I asked Mrs. Scully to make it.”
    Mom fingered the fabric. “This is beautiful!” She pulled the dress out and shook it free of the paper. Then, all at once, her expression changed.
    “Is this some kind of mean joke?” she barked.
    I didn’t know what she was talking about.
    “Are you calling me fat?” she snapped.
    “Now, Catherine,” said my father.
    “What’s wrong?” I asked.
    “This dress is way too small! There is no way it’ll fit!” my mother screamed at me.
    “B-b-but—but—” I sputtered. “We used your old blue dress as a pattern.”
    “That hasn’t fit since before Pinky was born!” Mom screamed. “Tommy, I can’t believe you did this!”
    She stood up and pushed over the tree she’d worked on for so many hours. It tottered once on its stand, then slowly fell to the ground with a crash of shattering ornaments. Mom gasped at what she had done, then ran off to her bedroom.
    Pinky started to cry.
    My father and Mary Lou stared at each other, but I couldn’t meet their eyes. For the first time, I wished Mary Lou wasn’t home. At least then she wouldn’t have seen how I’d ruined Christmas Day.
    “Thomas,” said my father quietly. “I didn’t mean . . . I didn’t realize that dress was too small. Holidays are hard for her and you can’t take it personally.”
    “How am I supposed to take it?” I shrieked at him. I sounded just like my mother, and that scared me worse than anything she had done.
    Mary Lou stared at the wall.
    “I’m going out,” I said.
    No one bothered to answer.
As I walked the paper route, I kept expecting to start crying. But I didn’t. Somehow, I made my way to Mrs. Scully’s. I don’t know what I thought I was going to do. Confront her for making the dress the wrong size?
    Mrs. Scully invited me in for hot chocolate. She wore a crimson dress trimmed with white, and lipstick that matched. It made her look a bit like a candy cane. Her tree was only a plant on a table, but no one was yelling at each other. “So tell me,” she said, as she shoved a mug of hot chocolate into my hands, “how did your mother like the dress?”
    Time froze for a moment, as I wondered what to say. I wanted to tell her the truth, wanted to blame her, wanted a shoulder to cry on, but more than that, I wanted her house to stay just the way it was, messy, happy and peaceful. “She loved it,” I said.
    Mrs. Scully grinned. “I’m so glad, Tommy. You’re such a thoughtful boy.” She hugged me tight. She smelled like peaches and petunias, and I could feel the lipstick that came off as she kissed my cheek. “I’ve got something for you,” she said. “Come on downstairs.”
    I followed her into the basement, which was filled with a huge table covered with the most elaborate train set I had ever seen. It had a station and a mountain, a lake to run the train around and a forest to motor through. There were all sorts of different trains, tiny signals and people, small figures waiting to get on, to journey to who knows where.
    “You must think I’m strange,” she said. “To live here all alone. When my husband died, I thought about getting a smaller place, but then what would I do with the trains! Aren’t they lovely?”
    “Yes,” I marveled. “They’re magnificent.”
    I watched the train, running in circles around the track. I could have stood there for hours.
    “You did say you were a cowboy fan, right?” Mrs. Scully started rummaging through a box in the corner.
    “Yes.”
    She pulled out a small train. “This is just like the engine in High Noon. You know the one, when they’re waiting for the bad guy to come into town. Grace Kelly gets on it, like she’s going to leave and abandon her husband, but of course at the last minute she jumps off and she doesn’t. You have seen High Noon, haven’t you?”
    “Five times,” I said.
    “Oh, you’re a fellow fan. This’ll be perfect then.” And she handed the train to me.
    It was heavy in my hand. Made of painted metal, it did look just like the one in High Noon. If only I could get on a train like that and ride away from all my problems. “It’s beautiful,” I said, handing it back to her.
    “No, no.” She waved me off. “It’s for you.”
    “But . . . I haven’t done anything,” I said. “You hardly know me.”
    She smiled at me. “Usually I love living by myself. But at times it gets a little lonely. And you stopped by to say hello on Christmas.”
Mrs. Glazov was equally excited to see me. [SB139]She opened the door almost before I was done knocking.
    “Tommy,” she exclaimed. “Merry Christmas.”
    She made me tea and served cookies. While we ate and drank, she read me every headline on the front page of the Tribune. I felt as proud as a mama bird that’s just taught her fledgling to fly. After the reading, she announced, “Now we play.” We ran through all our favorite Christmas carols, ending with “Silent Night.” When we were done, I sat there quietly for a minute. This is what Christmas should be like, I thought.
    “Now,” she said quietly. “You go home. Things calmed down.”
    “What?”
    “Sometimes I hear,” she admitted. “Yelling. Crying. No more today. You go home.”
    I lugged the accordion back with me, and poked my head into the living room. Dad had finished sweeping up the glass and the tree was standing again, sparkling as if it had never been knocked over at all. Pinky was playing with her new doll.
    Mom walked into the room, carrying a pie. She’d gotten dressed, combed her hair, put on lipstick. But her eyes were still red from crying. “Oh good, Tommy,” she said brightly, as if nothing had happened. “You’re back. And you have the accordion! Play us something. A polka maybe. I love polkas!” She pulled out a chair from the dining room and placed it in the center of the room for me.
    My father nodded, and pushed back the couch.
    I picked up the accordion and sat down on the chair and started to play the brightest, happiest polka I could. This was my plan. This was what I had wanted. My dad asked my mom to dance and they began to whirl across the floor, just as I remembered them doing when I was little. Pinky clapped her hands. Mary Lou looked over at me and smiled.
    And that’s when I started to cry. Huge tears that rolled down my eyes, so I couldn’t even see my parents. I wasn’t sure I would be able to finish the song, but I did. Mary Lou finally noticed. “What’s wrong, Tommy?”
    “I’m just so happy,” I lied.
    Mom smiled and went off to cook Christmas dinner. Dad patted me on the shoulder. I pasted on a smile so fake I thought my skin would crack. We never mentioned the tree again. 
