9
Pain Pills
If Christmas day was bad, the week afterward was even worse. I guess I’d thought I’d spend the break with my sister, talking and playing games, like we always had before. But Mary Lou’s bandages needed to be changed every few hours and ointments needed to be applied. Mom insisted she was the only one who could do it properly, since she had picked Mary Lou up from the hospital and been instructed by the nurses. More than once, I found Mom clutching a soiled bandage, tears running down her face. Every time I offered to help, she shook her head and told me to go away.
    I discovered that when Mary Lou said she could walk from the bed to the bathroom, she meant if she had twenty minutes and an hour to lie down afterward. Mom went after her like a drill sergeant, yelling and screaming and cursing at her to do the stretches from the hospital or to hobble down the hall one more time. Mary Lou yelled back at first: “I’m trying!” or “Get out of my way!” Then it changed to “I can’t do it,” and “Leave me alone,” and finally she just meekly tried to comply, tears running down her face.
    Mom and Dad started arguing too, screaming behind closed doors, as if a skinny old wooden bedroom door would prevent us from hearing what they had to say. “I thought you said they were suggestions,” Dad argued. “It’s vacation. You don’t have to force her to do them every single day.”
    In the living room, Mary Lou and I concentrated on our game of checkers.  Pinky watched intently.
    “They said it would be good for her!" Mom countered. "Don’t you want what’s best for your daughter?”
    “Of course I do, but—”
    “You don’t care if she’s deformed or can’t walk. If she doesn’t get better, no one will ever want to marry her and we’ll be stuck with—”
    Pinky's eyes were wide. “Is Mary Lou going to turn into a monster?” she asked.
    “No,” I said.
    “Take her outside,” said Mary Lou. “She doesn’t need to hear this.”
    “You come too,” I said.
    Mary Lou shook her head. “It’s too cold for me since I can’t . . . move around fast enough to stay warm.”
    “But—”
    “You take Pinky. It doesn’t bother me, Tommy.”
    But I knew it did bother her. The next day when I got up at 4:30 to do the paper route, I heard Mary Lou crying in her room. When I opened the door to check on her, she rolled over and pretended to be asleep. I couldn’t wait for school to start again, so I could escape to St. Joe’s. I missed Eddie, but he had gone out-of-town to visit relatives. I thought about Sister Ann. Heck, I would even have been happy to see Little Skinny.
    And if the yelling wasn’t enough, Mom started rationing Mary Lou’s pain pills too, stretching out the time between doses a little bit more every day, or cutting the tablets in half. “You’re stronger than that,” Mom told Mary Lou when she complained.
    When the pain got so bad all Mary Lou could do was lie on her bed and cry, I snuck into the bathroom and got the other half of the pill that she was supposed to have had in the first place.
    Those days were so awful, I jumped out of bed at 4:30 each morning, relieved to have an excuse to get away from the house for a few hours. One morning when I returned from the route, Mom was waiting for me in the kitchen, holding the bottle of pain pills in her hand.
    “Yesterday when I counted these pills there were six. Why are there now only four?”
    “Mary Lou was in pain,” I explained. “She hurt so much she couldn’t even sleep.”
    “Do you want to turn your sister into a drug addict?” Her face was red with anger, her jaw clenched.
    “The doctor prescribed them!”
    “I’m doing what’s best for her.” Mom’s hair flew out of her bun as she shook the bottle of pills.
    "But Dr. Stanton prescribed those sleeping pills for you."
    "Tommy!"
"You don't seem to have any problem taking them!"     That’s when I saw she already had Dad’s belt curled up in her hand. 
    "Don't speak to me in that tone!" she screamed.  
    “It doesn’t matter what I say,” I muttered. “You’re going to hit me anyway.”
    And she did. And I let her. Pulled down my pants and just stood there. I hated her for punishing me this way, when I was just trying to help my sister. And even though I swore I wouldn't, I starting crying, not from the pain, but because I was so angry and embarrassed. 
    Mom yelled at me to stop, and at first I did. Guess I was in the habit of doing what she said. But as she kept hitting me, I decided crying might be my one last way to spite her.
    ’Course I was wrong. Crying only made it worse, ’cause Mary Lou heard me. She hobbled into the kitchen, holding onto the doorframe to keep her balance. "Stop it, Mom!  Stop!" she shrieked. "I don't need the pills. I won't take them anymore."
    I knew Mary Lou was trying to help, but it was mortifying to have my older sister see me, my pants around my ankles, crying like a baby. I wanted to scream at her to go away, but I couldn't get out the words.
    Mom just ignored Mary Lou and kept hitting me.
    Boots joined in then, barking desperately, although he stayed in the doorway at Mary Lou's feet, not daring to set foot in the kitchen.
"Catherine!" Dad boomed, appearing behind Mary Lou.    
    Mom paused, the belt dangling from her hand.
Thank God. Was Dad going to finally step up for me?    
    Mom was breathing hard, sweat on her forehead, even though it was cold in the room.
    Mary Lou was weeping quietly now. “Take me back to the hospital. Please, take me back! I can’t stand it here another minute!”
    Dad led her out of the room. Boots stayed, watching me and whining softly.
    Mom hit me once more with the belt, then dropped it on the floor. [SB141]The house was still. It seemed, suddenly, too quiet with no one yelling or crying.
    “I have a headache,” said Mom. “I’m going back to bed.” She left the room without even picking up the belt.
    I heard the car roar to life. They were leaving now? Didn’t Mary Lou need to pack? I ran to the garage to say good-bye, but they were already gone.
    Boots and I sat in the garage all afternoon, waiting for my dad to return. It was cold and my backside ached. My hands felt numb, even as I buried them in Boots' warm fur.
    Finally, my dad returned. “Tommy, what are you doing here?” His long gray overcoat fluttered as he slammed the car door.
    “Why didn’t you step in sooner?” I asked.
    “You disobeyed your mother.”
    “Mary Lou should have had those pills in the first place. You know that!”
    “What do you want me to do, Tommy?” Dad screamed. “What do you want me to do!” 
    “Nothing,” I said. I went inside and lay down on my bed. Boots pressed up against my side and I cried myself to sleep.
