1
Racing with Little Skinny
Every January the nuns took us over to Prince Pond for an afternoon of skating. Prince Pond was a small pond, about the length of one block, that froze over every winter. With the money from the paper drive, the homeowners’ association had constructed an open shelter at one end where you could build a fire to stay warm.
    Sister Ann and the other nuns chatted on the bank, their arms tucked under their habits so that they looked like giant bowling pins waiting to be knocked over. Peter was fooling around, skating in circles and throwing snowballs at any girl who turned her back. Little Skinny sat in the shelter with Lizzie Johnson and some of the other girls from our class. Every now and then one of them would add a bit of wood to the fire.
    Not that we really needed a fire. The past ten days had been unseasonably warm, making it above freezing for a good portion of each day. It was probably 35 or 36 degrees that afternoon, not cold at all for Downers Grove in the winter. In any case, hot from all the skating, I’d left my jacket on the bank.
    Eddie had just beaten Peter and Luke in a race and he threw himself down on the ice, breathing hard. “So,” he called out, confident as a cowboy on a prize-winning steed, “who’s going to race me next?” He leaned back on his hands like he was at the beach. Everyone stared at him. “No takers?”
    Little Skinny walked slowly over from the shelter. He still had his shoes on and he slipped, almost falling, waving his arms like a bird to catch himself. “I’ll race you,” he said. “But I don’t have any skates.” He looked over at me.
    It was like he was challenging me to see if I’d be nice to him at school, in front of the others. I took the dare.
    “I’ll loan you mine,” I said. I pulled off my skates and gave them a little push so they glided across the ice to Little Skinny.
    He smiled and put them on quickly, almost without looking at the laces. “Three times around the pond?” Little Skinny suggested.
    Eddie nodded. “Fine with me.”
    They both skated over to the charcoal line we’d been using as a starting mark. There was a large ring of stones around the middle of the pond. The other boys and I had placed them there when we’d first arrived, creating a makeshift lane around the edge for racing. That way the girls could skate in the middle without getting in our way.
    “Here are the rules,” I said. “Stay in the lane, three times around, no funny business—no tripping, pushing, stuff like that.”
    They nodded.
    “On your mark,” I said. “Get set. Go!”
    During the first lap, Eddie and Little Skinny stayed pretty even. I was surprised. Little Skinny was actually a good skater, moving smoothly across the ice. By the time the second lap was done, Little Skinny was slightly ahead.
    “Come on, Eddie!” Luke called.
    I wasn’t sure who to root for.
    Eddie skated faster, really giving it his all. But Little Skinny did too, pulling ahead a little bit more. By the final turn, it wasn’t even a contest. Little Skinny was a full body-length ahead. A moment later he crossed the finish line first and raised his hands in the air. “I won!”
    Everyone, on the ice and in the shelter, was looking at him.
    Angry, Eddie purposely crashed into the lane, sending the rocks flying. “You can skate!” 
    Little Skinny grinned. “Ever since I could walk,” he said proudly. “I can ski too. Everyone can, where I’m from. There were lots of mountains.”
    “You tricked me!” Eddie said.
    “What’s wrong, Eddie?” Little Skinny taunted. “Did I embarrass you in front of your friends?”
    “You little communist!” Eddie yelled, and took a swing at Little Skinny.
    Little Skinny ducked and stumbled on the ice, but he didn’t fall.
    “He’s not a communist,” I said quietly.
    “Well, his dad sure is,” said Eddie. “I heard my father talking about it.”
    I grabbed Eddie’s arm and pulled him a couple of steps away from Little Skinny. “Take it back!”
    “No, I won’t,” he said. “And why do you care, Tommy?”
    “It’s not true,” I argued. “You shouldn’t be spreading lies about Mr. McKenzie!”
    “But everybody knows he’s a communist. It’s why no one shops there anymore,” said Eddie.
    “It’s not true!”
    “How do you know?” asked Eddie.
    My stomach hurt like I'd been punched. “Because I was the one who put the copy of the Daily Worker in his store.”
    “What?” said Eddie. “The one you found on the paper drive?”
    I nodded. “Didn’t you figure it out?”
    “But I thought Mr. McKenzie was the communist?”
    Luke and Peter stood watching us, taking in every word.
    “It was just a joke,” I said. “I didn’t know everyone would take it so seriously!”
    The nuns rang a bell then, signaling it was time to return to school. I started obediently back to the bank, but Eddie stood there in the center of the pond.
    So did Little Skinny. And something had snapped in him, because his eyes were no longer sad, they were mad.
    “One time,” he said. “I got the best of you one time. And you had to go and ruin it!” He took a deep breath like he was going to start crying.  Instead, he punched Eddie in the stomach.
    I was so surprised, it took me a moment to react. By that point, Little Skinny had his full weight on top of Eddie and was pounding away. One hit after another. I could see the blood spurting out of Eddie’s nose.
    Eddie was yelling and I tried to pull Little Skinny off, but he threw me aside, like a bear with a dog. For the first time, I could see Mr. McKenzie’s toughness in Little Skinny. He kept pounding Eddie, but maybe Eddie deserved it. For the coal. And the candy. And all the ways we’d hurt Little Skinny. Maybe I deserved to be beaten too.
    The nuns were gathered around the edge of the pond, yelling. None of them had skates on and they kept slipping as they tried to venture onto the ice. Then there was a loud cracking sound, almost like thunder.
    “Stop,” I yelled. “Sam, stop!”
    Little Skinny stopped pounding Eddie and turned to look at me. The pond rumbled again.
    Eddie scrambled to his feet.
    “The ice!” cried a girl from the bank.
    Everyone scattered, Eddie and I reaching solid ice just in time. But Little Skinny stood still for just a moment too long. By the time he started to move, there was another crack, even louder this time, and the ice broke up beneath him. He fell into the water.
    The pond was only three feet [CE144]deep, so it wasn't like he was going to drown or anything. But when Little Skinny stood up, he just looked so cold and miserable with the water running down his face.
    Peter started to laugh. Luke glared at him. I pulled out a handkerchief and handed it to Eddie. He pressed it against his nose to stop the bleeding.
    Little Skinny tried to pull himself onto the solid ice, but his weight was too much and the ice kept cracking as he tried to scramble out.
    The nuns screamed for someone to find a rope. Peter kept laughing. I had another idea. I ran to the shelter and grabbed the fire poker. Then I ran, sliding without my skates, back onto the ice. When I got close to the hole, I lay down on the ice and held out the poker.
    “Grab it,” I said.
    Little Skinny did. With a huge effort, I managed to pull him onto the ice. He followed me, crawling almost all the way back to the bank before daring to stand up again.
    Peter was laughing, laughing so hard he was doubled over, clutching his stomach. I knew he expected me to join in too, play it off as a huge joke, but I just couldn’t.
    The nuns came running over. “Are you all right, Samuel?” Sister Ann cried.
    “Cold,” he choked out. He was shivering so badly, I thought his skeleton would shake right out of his body. I grabbed my coat from the bank and handed it to him.
    Sister Ann ushered Little Skinny over to the fire. But once he warmed up a bit, she started to lecture. “Samuel,” she said sternly, “we saw you hitting Eddie. Fighting is strictly forbidden at St. Joe’s. I’m afraid you’ll—”
    “No,” I said suddenly. “It wasn’t his fault. Eddie hit first.”
    Eddie looked at me, surprised and bewildered. We didn’t rat each other out. We kept each other’s secrets.
    But I went on. “Eddie provoked him,” I said. “Called his dad a communist.”
    Sister Ann sighed. “Even if Eddie was teasing him, that’s no reason to—”
    “No,” I insisted. “His dad is going to lose his store because of those rumors. And it’s my fault too because I was the one who started them.”
    Everyone was suddenly quiet and staring at me. Even Lizzie was looking at me with a little half smile on her face that made me think maybe she didn’t hate my guts quite so much anymore.
    Sister Ann, however, looked exhausted. “Eddie, are you hurt?” she asked.
    “Yes!” He held up the bloody handkerchief.
    “Do you need a doctor?”
    “No,” Eddie admitted.
    “Good. Samuel, are you okay?”
    “Cold.” Little Skinny’s teeth chattered and he was shivering violently.
    Sister Ann nodded decisively. “Tommy, take Samuel home and get him some dry clothes. Everyone else, back to school!”
