2
the Apartment
The store was closed when we arrived but Little Skinny had a key. “Dad’s probably at the hospital,” he said. And he didn’t have to say the rest: because Mom’s not doing so well.
    The dark, empty shelves gave the store an eerie feel. Little Skinny marched right through it, heading for the stairs. I’d never seen their apartment before, but I followed him up the narrow staircase.
    There was a simple living room at the top, a couch, a table and an armchair. The furniture was well-worn, but everything was neat and tidy.
    “Wait here,” said Little Skinny. “I’ll go get some dry clothes.”
    While he was gone, I looked around. In one corner, there was a small table with a funny metal machine on top. It had a round drum and a handle.
    “What’s that?” I asked, when Little Skinny returned.
    “A mimeograph machine,” Little Skinny said, drying his hair with a towel.
    “Where’d you get it?” I asked.
    “The church was throwing it away,” he said. “I fixed it myself. I’m good at things like that.”
    “How does it work?” I asked.
    Little Skinny sighed. “You put this special sheet, it’s called a stencil, in the typewriter and type out what you want to say. Then you can run off as many copies as you want. My dad writes family letters every month, and I make copies of them so he can send them to all his relatives. He lets me use the extra stencils.”
    “For your stories?”
    “Yeah.”
    “Going to let me read one?”
    “No.” But this time he said it with a smile. It was odd to think he had secrets, a whole other life, one where he wrote stories and was good at skating and could fix things.
    “Ready to go?” Little Skinny asked.
    “What about your wet clothes?”
    “What about them?”
    “Don’t you need to wash them?”
    He shrugged. “I’ll do it when I get home.”
    “I'd be afraid my mom would beat me if I left wet clothes lying around,” I said without thinking.
    Little Skinny laughed.
    But I wasn’t joking. And I guess after a minute Little Skinny realized that, because as we were walking back down the stairs he asked, “Your mom hit you a lot?”
    I shrugged. “She always used to yell, but since Mary Lou has been in the hospital, she’s . . . gotten worse.”
    When I reached the bottom of the stairs, I peeked over, expecting to see pity in Little Skinny’s eyes, but he just looked surprised. As if he hadn’t realized I had another life too. “You always seem so confident, Tommy. Like nothing ever bothers you.”
    “Ha!” I laughed, short and bitter. “Wouldn’t that be nice.”
    “But you do stuff,” said Little Skinny. “I’ve wanted to go out and steal a bunch of yo-yos more than once.” We walked back through the dark store. “I just don’t have the guts.”
    Was he saying he admired me? For stealing yo-yos? “Nah,” I said. “Guts are overrated.”
    Little Skinny laughed, then looked embarrassed.
    “We’d better get back to school,” I said.
    “Yeah,” he replied.
    We walked the rest of the way in silence. Then, right before we went inside, he said, “You called me Sam. Before the ice cracked.” It was almost a question.
    I nodded. “Isn’t that your name?”
    He smiled. “Yeah, it is.”
That afternoon I was a few minutes late leaving the building after school. I had to finish the math assignment I’d missed when I was with Sam. And I wanted to make sure I didn’t run into Eddie. So by the time I made it outside, Mom was waiting by the car. She was leaning against the hood, her arms crossed over her chest. She looked like a mess. Her hair was uncombed, her dress wrinkled. Her eyes were wide and a bit unfocused, as if she’d taken one of Dr. Stanton’s pills and then drunk a whole pot of coffee to stay awake. “You’re late.”
    “Little Skinny, I mean Sam, fell through the ice.”
    “Don’t lie to me,” Mom sneered.
    “I’m not.”
    Mom slapped me.
    The sound seemed to echo across the school yard. Everyone turned to look at us. Sister Ann stood in the school doorway, watching. I thought I would be embarrassed, but maybe, like Sam, I’d just had enough.
    I turned the other side of my face toward her. “Go ahead,” I said. “Slap the other side.”
    She did.
    Sister Ann walked up to our car then. “Is everything all right, Mrs. Wilson?” she asked, her wimple blowing in the wind.
    Instantly, Mom was all smiles. “Of course, Sister Ann. Tommy was just being disrespectful.”
    “I see,” said Sister Ann. She looked at me, but I didn’t say a word, just got into the backseat with Pinky.
    My sister climbed into my lap and gave me a big hug. “I wet my pants this morning,” she said. “Mommy’s in a bad mood.”
    “I know.”
    Mom got into the driver’s seat, and I was surprised when Sister Ann climbed into the front beside her. Mom said, “We’re ever so grateful, Sister, that you’re coming to the hospital to tutor Mary Lou.”
    “It’s my pleasure,” Sister Ann said.
    I guess Father Miskel had approved of the idea. No one had bothered to tell me.
    Mom drove way too fast, skidding on the ice when she turned. No one said a word all the way to the hospital. As soon as we arrived, Sister Ann and Mom went up to see Mary Lou. They were gone a long time.
    When I finally got to see Mary Lou, my sister chattered on and on, about how great it felt to do her school lessons. “Sister Ann said if I worked really, really hard, I might even be able to graduate with the other eighth graders!” She grinned. “And it’s all thanks to you, Tommy!”
    But it didn’t feel great. It felt like everything was falling apart.
    I sat in the chair next to her bed and looked out the window as I listened.
    “Is something wrong?” Mary Lou asked. “You’re quiet today.”
    I just shook my head. I didn’t know where to start.
