1
the Right Words
That evening after dinner, while my dad was putting Pinky to bed, I talked to Mrs. Glazov about my idea to raise money for Mary Lou. “Wonderful!” she exclaimed. “Concert to support local burned girl—everyone will come!”
    I grinned.
    “And you must play too,” Mrs. Glazov said. “Brother of Mary Lou—you will be star!”
    I wasn’t sure I liked the idea of sitting on the stage at the Tivoli with everyone looking at me. But Mrs. Glazov was smiling at me with a wide, toothy grin I’d never seen before. Surely anything that made her that happy couldn’t be bad.
    I nodded.
The next morning[SB185], I couldn’t wait to tell the Kopeckys about my idea. I hadn’t talked to Dad yet, I wanted to be sure it would work out first so I could surprise him, but I was pretty sure Ma and Pa would love the idea. In fact, I was so excited about telling them that I decided to risk the possibility that I might see Mom. I knocked, softly in case Ma and Pa were still sleeping, and of course it was my mother who opened the door,.
    Mom looked better. It had been about a week since I’d seen her. The bruises on her face had faded, and the cut on her forehead was now only a faint scar. There was gray in her hair that had never been there before, but it made her look kinder and less on edge. Even her eyes were not as tired.
    “T-T-Tommy,” she sputtered. She seemed surprised to see me. “A couple of chickens escaped again. Pa and Ma are out back trying to catch them.”
    “Oh.”
    “You look well, Tommy.”
    It was a little odd to hear that from my mom, as if I was an acquaintance she barely knew, not her only son. But even if they weren’t exactly the rights words, at least she was trying. “Thanks,” I said. “How’s it going with Pa?”
    Mom shrugged, just like I did when I didn’t really want to answer a question. “All right, I guess. I just sit on a couch and he asks me questions about my childhood or my dreams.”
    “Oh,” I said again. “Is it helping?”
    “The verdict’s still out,” Mom said with a little half smile.
    I smiled too, wanting to be happy she was acting normal again, when all I could really think was, how long is this going to last?
    Pa walked up to the doorway then, his tall, thin frame slicing through the tension[SB186]. “We found the chickens so you can—oh, Tommy!”
    Mom and I both stared at the floor, like we were guilty kids who’d been caught with our hands in the cookie jar.
    “Would you like to come in for some eggs?” Pa asked.
    I shook my head. “No thanks, I’m already late. But I could come by sometime next week and put a new door on the chicken coop.”
    Pa nodded. “That’d be great.”
    I turned and ran back to the sled. It wasn’t until I was already three houses down that I realized I’d forgotten to tell them about the concert.
Mrs. Glazov was frowning when I got home from the paper route. “I realize problem.” She sighed as she handed me my lunch. “No money to advertise. No money for flyers. Without advertise, no one will come.”
    Flyers. “Like you make on a mimeograph machine?”
    “Yes.”
    I knew who had one of those. “Don’t worry,” I said, as I rushed out the door to catch the bus. “Leave that to me.”
Sam wasn’t at school that day, so I didn’t get a chance to speak to him. I told myself he was just sick, had the flu or a bad cold, but he had missed a few days of school the week before as well. To miss again so soon . . . I was afraid I knew what that meant.
After school I stopped by Mr. McKenzie’s again. I told myself I was only going to ask about the mimeograph machine, but really I was worried about Sam. When I got to the shop, Sam and his father were just coming out. Mr. McKenzie looked at me, his eyes as hollow as an empty bird’s nest in a cactus. He opened his mouth like he was going to say something, then just shook his head and got into the car. My breath caught in my throat, a hard sharp pain, as if I'd been hit in the stomach.
    Sam stood beside me for a moment. His face was blank and so tense that even the skin on the smooth cheek was pulled tight. His eyes were tinged with red. “She died, Tommy,” he said. “Early this morning.”
    I put my hand on his shoulder. He was trembling, just like Boots when he’d gotten the huge cut on his belly and I’d carried him up the steps into Mrs. Scully’s house. I felt awful for him.
    “But I talked to her. Before she died. She said Dad and I could take care of each other. She didn't where she was buried. We should give away her clothes. Keep whatever letters we wanted. And she told us ‘wedding ring.’”
    “What does that mean?”
    Sam shrugged. “I don’t know. I asked Dad, but he said Mother didn’t have one. She lost it years ago.” He started to cry. When he continued, he sounded defiant, almost angry. “But she said it, right? Three times. Just before she died. It must be important!”
“Yeah,” I said. “It must.” I wanted to say something else, wanted to find the right words to make him feel better.     
    Mr. McKenzie honked the car’s horn.
    “I have to go,” Sam said. “My dad’s cousin in Chicago is going to pay for the funeral. We have to go talk to him.”
    I nodded.
    “She wasn't alone. That means something, right?”
    “Yeah. It does.”
    Sam smiled weakly and got into the car. I watched them drive away. Even though I’d only met Sam’s mom that one time, I felt like crying too. It could have been me in that car. If Mary Lou had been burned just a little bit more, or if Mom had been driving just a little bit faster, it might have been me. And I suddenly felt less angry about all the people who had said nothing to me about my mother. Sometimes the right words were hidden away, like a legendary lost treasure, nearly impossible to find.
