3 
Another Word for Help
Mrs. Glazov loved the idea of having Mr. McKenzie provide refreshments, but the newly formed Downers Grove Musical Society was harder to sell on the plan.[CE194] She invited them all over to her house on a cold evening in mid-February and served them tea. I was invited too.
    “McKenzie’s?” the trumpet player said, turning his lips upside down in a scowl. “Isn’t he the communist?”
    “Nah, he’s not a communist,” the flute player said. “But he is a Gypsy.”
    “Communist or Gypsy,” said a bald man with a big belly, who played the guitar, “I don’t like either of them.”
    “You know Mr. Sullivan?” added the trumpet player. “He said he caught him red-handed with a commie newspaper in his store!”
    “Wait a minute!” I said. I knew the communist rumors would be a problem, but maybe . . . “Did I say the new store was going to be called McKenzie’s?” I laughed. “It’s going to be called Sam’s Sandwich Shop.”
    “Who’s Sam?” asked the flute player.
    “Isn’t that McKenzie’s kid?” said the bald man. “The fat kid with the burned face?”
    “Yes, yes,” Mrs. Glazov said. “We help him.”
    Everyone was quiet for a moment. Then the bald man shook his head. “I don’t know.”
    “If one burned kid will bring people out,” the flute player pointed out, “two might be even better.”
    The trumpet player looked thoughtful. “Ezekiel 18:20,” he said finally. “‘The son shall not bear the guilt [CE195]of the father.’”
    They all turned to look at the guitar player.
    “All right,” he said finally. “No need to start quoting the Bible at me. My wife already got on my case for missing Mass last week!”
    Everyone laughed.
    So it was decided: the first concert would be to raise money for the medical bills of one Mary Lou Wilson, and the refreshments would be provided by Sam’s Sandwich Shop.
Mr. McKenzie had no problem with changing the name of the shop. “It’s a great idea,” he said. “I should have thought of it myself.”
    Sam was thrilled to have the shop named after him, and we got right to work designing the flyers. Sam wrote out the date, time and place, neat as a typewriter, then drew a little picture beneath the words.
    “Is that a boy playing the accordion?” I asked when he was done.
    “Yep,” said Sam.
    It even kind of looked like me. We printed off a few sample copies and I ran home, eager to show them to my dad. He was going to be so excited. I’d asked Mrs. Glazov not to say anything to him yet. I wanted it to be a surprise. I wanted to swoop in and save the day like a cowboy in the movies.[SB196]
That Sunday, February 21 we visited Mary Lou at the hospital. Once Dad went off to talk to the doctors, I showed Mary Lou our flyer and told her about the concert. She was delighted. “Oh my goodness, Tommy!” she squealed. “A concert in my honor!” She was sitting in the rocking chair beside her bed, rocking back and forth.
    “You’re gonna come, right?”
    “Of course! If I have to walk all the way myself.”
    We giggled.
    “You don’t mind taking charity?” I asked.[SB197]
    Mary Lou picked at one of the bandages on her legs, unrolling it and then rolling it up again. “What's so bad about accepting charity? I’ve been in the hospital a long time now. Almost five months[CE198]. I’ve had to have help with everything—getting dressed, combing my hair, learning to walk again, even going to the bathroom! It bothered me for a long time.”
    It would have bothered me too.
    “You know, Tommy,” Mary Lou went on, “before I got burned, I believed if I just tried hard enough, nothing bad would ever happen."
    “That’s not true, is it?”
    “No,” she said. “It’s not. Sometimes we all need a hand. Charity is just another word for help."
    I liked that.
    The rocking chair squeaked as Mary Lou glided back and forth. “Make sure you bring some extra flyers for the nurses,” she said finally. “I think they’re all going to want to come too.”
    Driving home seemed like the perfect time to tell Dad about my plan. But unlike Mary Lou, he was anything but thrilled.
    “No, Tommy,” he said when I finished telling him about our plans. “I don’t like that idea at all.”
    I was irritated. If Mary Lou didn’t mind, how could he object? We needed the money! I started explaining my idea again, but I hadn’t get very far before Dad interrupted: “No, I won’t have everyone knowing that I can’t support my own family.”
    “But . . .”
    “Tommy, this is not your problem.”
    “But Mrs. Glazov and her friends have been rehearsing for weeks now.”
    “Well, they can have a concert,” said Dad, “but it doesn’t need to be for us.”
    “I thought you believed in people helping each other,” I said.
    “I do, but . . .”
    “Then what happened to ‘From each according to his abilities, to each according to his needs.’”
    “That’s different,” Dad said.
    “How? I can play the accordion to entertain people. We need money. Seems like a fair trade to me.”
    Dad was quiet a long time. “We have already accepted so much. Mrs. Glazov’s help. Ma and Pa’s. And I . . .”
    “Wasn’t that your dream, though, Dad? To live in a place where people help each other?”
    “Yeah,” Dad said quietly. “I guess it was.”
    “It’s not only your dream. It’s Mrs. Glazov wanting to be a music teacher again. She might get a bunch of new students from the concert. And Mr. McKenzie has a chance to start his sandwich shop. It’s a way for people to find out about that too!”
    “And we need the money,” Dad added.
    “Yeah.”
    I waited. It was a dark night, our headlights shining on the lonely road.
    “It’s like that movie,” I said. “It’s a Wonderful Life. Bedford Falls[CE199] helped Jimmy Stewart. Let our town help us now.”
    “Okay,” Dad said finally. [SB200]“I'm proud of you, Tommy. It still makes me a little uncomfortable, but . . .”
    “You’re uncomfortable?” I teased. “I’m the one who has to be up there in front of everyone playing the accordion!”
    Dad laughed. “Well then, you’d better get practicing.”[SB201]
