9
the Cemetery
The first week in May Sam came up with the idea of letting the students at St. Joseph’s place orders for sandwiches. This was a big hit, both with the kids (because the sandwiches were delicious) and the parents (because they didn’t have to make lunches). So every morning, along with the bottles of milk from the milkman, came sandwiches from Sam’s shop.
    One day during lunch recess when I’d just finished my sandwich, I made my way over to the big elm tree. “Hey, Sam!” I called out, sitting down next to him.
    “What?” He gave me a look. He’d played marbles with us once or twice now, but still spent many lunchtimes by himself.
    “You’re the one!”
    “Tommy, I don’t like it when you—”
    “Just go on,” I said kindly. “Ask it, one more time.”
    “The one what?” He sighed. But for the first time, there was a hint of a smile on his face as he said it.
    “The best darn writer in the whole class.” I slammed his story down on the ground, like a cowboy throwing down a royal flush in a movie.
    “You shouldn’t say darn,” said Peter, who’d followed me over. Luke and Eddie were close behind.
    “Shut up, Peter,” I said.
    “Is it really good?” asked Luke, picking up a corner of the story.
    “Better than Kid Colt Outlaw,” I said.
    “Can I read Sam’s story?” Eddie asked.
    “I had it first,” said Luke.
    Sam and I looked at each other and grinned.
    “Simmer down, boys.” I leaned over and put my arm around Sam. “He’s got plenty more where that came from. But it’ll cost you. A nickel a story!”
    “Tommy,” Sam protested. “They can read them for free.”
    “Sam,” I said elbowing him, “I’m trying to make you some money.”
    “I’d rather have the friends,” he said. “A penny a story,” he announced loudly.
    Luke nodded. “Sounds fair to me.” The boys dug into their pockets looking for change. I pulled out a penny.
    “Keep it,” said Sam. “You read for free.”
    I’d always thought it would feel embarrassing to be nice to Sam at school. But it wasn’t. It felt really good. “Come on, Sam,” I said.
    “What?”
    “We’re going to play kick ball.”
    “Nah,” he said. “I don’t know how. Probably wouldn’t be good at it anyway.”
    “I’ll teach you.”
    “I’m writing another story.”
    “Sam.”
    “What?”
    “Come on. You can finish the story tomorrow.”
    I grabbed his arm and pulled him up. Sam was on my team. Eddie rolled the ball to him, nice and gentle. Kick ball is pretty easy, and when Sam kicked the ball and made it to first base, everybody cheered.
After school, we all decided to go down to Sam’s Sandwich Shop for root beer floats. Well, all of us except for Eddie. He kind of lurked behind.[SB228]
    “Come on, Eddie,” I said. “What’s wrong?”
    “My dad’s not drinking so much anymore, but he still hasn’t found a job,” he admitted. “I don’t have any money.”
    Sam dug the pennies he’d collected for his story out of his pocket and pressed them into Eddie’s hand. “You do now.”
    Eddie looked at the pennies in his hand, little copper circles on his palm. He closed his hand around them, the coins clanging together, and put them back into Sam’s hand. “I can’t take them. I’ve been so mean.”
    “It’s a peace offering,” Sam said.
    “That’s what I said about the stocking,” Eddie said.
    “Well, unlike you,” I quipped, “Sam keeps his word.”
    Sam and Eddie both laughed.
    “All right,” Eddie said. “Give me back the coins.”
At the sandwich shop, the five of us squeezed into a booth meant for four. When we placed our orders, Mr. McKenzie promised to give us all extra ice cream in our floats. It was only the second week the shop was open, but I guessed it was doing pretty well. There were only a couple of empty seats at the counter.
    The door opened and Lizzie Johnson walked in. She was wearing a red-and-white ruffled dress that made her look like a peppermint. I jumped up and walked over to her. “Lizzie!”
    “Tommy!” Her smile was wide and her blue eyes sparkled.
    “Want to get that root beer float?” I asked.
    “Sure.”
    We sat down at the counter together.
    “Tommy!” Eddie called. “Don’t you two want to come sit with us?”
    “We’re fine here,” I said, and Lizzie blushed.
    In the booth, I could see my friends laughing and I knew they’d tease me about Lizzie tomorrow. But I’d teased them enough in the past. Surely I could take a little good-natured ribbing myself.
The next day after school, I drove with Mom to the hospital to pay the last of Mary Lou’s medical bills. She was coming home in a few days and was so busy practicing walking up and down the halls, I barely got a chance to say hello. Pinky and I ran around the courtyard we’d played in that very first day. The leaves were small and green now, the first flower buds just starting to form. [SB229]Susie was home with Mrs. Glazov.
    Mom took a deep breath as we left the hospital, tall and elegant as a swan as we walked to our car. “Tommy, I want to say thank you.”
    “For what?”
    “For doing the paper route. I thought we’d have to give it up when Mary Lou got burned. We needed the money, but I told Dad I wasn’t sure you could do it. You really rose to the occasion. I’m grateful.”
    It felt nice, but kind of odd to have Mom paying me a compliment. I thought of all the people I’d met on the paper route: Mrs. Glazov, and Pa and Ma, and Mrs. Scully and even Mr. McKenzie. “I’m grateful too.”
    On the way home, Mom hummed softly in the car. Pinky fell asleep as we drove. It was the first time I’d felt okay in the car with my mom since that horrible drive to the hospital. I was almost dozing off myself, when Mom turned away from our regular route.
    I was instantly as alert as a horse that’s spotted a rattlesnake. “Where are we going?” I asked, struggling to keep my voice from shaking.
    Mom didn’t answer.
    Had she gotten another speeding ticket? Panic rose in my throat. But I wasn’t the same kid I’d been then. I could handle this.
    But Mom didn’t turn in to the courthouse. She kept driving until she reached the cemetery. Then she turned off the ignition and sat still. It was the cemetery where Busia was buried. I’d only been there once before, for the funeral.
    Mom was curled up in the front seat, like a hurt bird in its nest. “I didn’t go that day,” she said.
    I remembered. It had been hot and Mom had been hugely pregnant with Susie. And she’d been hysterical.
    “I didn’t go to my own mother’s funeral,” she said, her voice flat.
    “She would have understood, Mom.”
    Mom snorted. I wasn’t quite sure if she was sad or angry, but when she climbed out of the car, I followed her. Pinky slept on in the back seat.
    It was only a few steps to Busia’s grave. The headstone was dark marble. It looked nice. “I should have brought flowers,” said Mom.
    “Next time,” I said.
    “I’ve never been here before,” Mom admitted. “Pa suggested I should come.”
    “Don’t feel bad, Mom,” I said. “You had a new baby. Mary Lou got hurt and—”
    “It wasn’t that Mary Lou was hurt,” Mom said, “it was that Busia was my mother and sometimes I hated her.”
    And Mom began to cry. All the times she’d cried over the past year, all the tears and weeping and yelling, this was the first time I really understood why.
    I reached out and took her hand.
    Mom cried harder.
      [SB230]But I held on. Mr. McKenzie had cried when he thought he’d lost his store. I’d sat with Sam when he’d lost his mom. Sometimes there were words to make things better. And sometimes there weren't. Sometimes, the best you could do was just stay there, bearing witness to the pain.
    When she was done, Mom looked more like herself than she had in a long, long time. “Come on, Tommy,” she said quietly. “Let’s go home.”[CE231][SB232]
